---
layout: post
title: "20km door Brussel"
date: 2015-05-31 17:05:00
tags:
- report
- road
---

Oh boy, the big one, if you're from Belgium. There are longer races, with a
marathon and a half marathon early October. There are similarly big races,
with the Antwerp 10 miles. The Brussels' 20k though. It has been around for a
while now. My dad used to run it, not that I remember that anymore, I was too
young at the time. I reckon it is the most important running race one can run
in Belgium.

## Before

Working up to it these past months has been going great, I used [Hal Higdon's
intermediate half marathon
plan](http://www.halhigdon.com/training/51132/Half-Marathon-Intermediate-Training-Program)
as a guideline. Some moving around to fit with the available races in the
neighbourhood. No issues had popped up at any point of this, until (how
wonderful) the very last week. My right knee sometimes felt a bit odd the past
weeks, but I attributed it to working in three pair of new shoes (two regular
pairs, one running shoe pair). The very last week, something went wrong. After
my last long run the previous Sunday, my right knee was in pain, to the left
side and a bit lower than the kneecap. By in pain I mean excruciating pain
whenever weight shifted to it. This is, of course, terrible. Luckily this was a
taper week so running was turned down quite a bit, but it was not healing as
quickly as I hoped. By Sunday morning the pain still crept up in the same way,
but it had lessened quite a bit: no longer from just walking, very manageable
when running. I decided to risk running the 20k because I had worked so long
for it and it felt OK enough. The pain went away once things really started.

## Race

So to race day! The race starts and ends in [Parc du
Cinquantenaire](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cinquantenaire) and this happens
in six waves of over 6,000 people each, totalling up to about 40,000 people.
Ever so slightly bigger than my previous biggest race which had about 2,400
people. I arrived near the area at about 9:30, 30 minutes before the official
start, thinking that was plenty of time. Turns out I had forgotten that big
crowds are not very efficient to go through. After a quick last minute piss, I
made my way to my starting box, box two. Arrived in time, but there might be a
need to come earlier in the future to warm up in a calm manner.

With Ravel's Bolero blaring through the speakers, as is traditional at this
20k, the boxes were getting pretty crowded. I fear I was a bit back in my own
box, but I was not sure what to expect yet anyway, it was something I could
live with. I did frown at people from another box (you can tell by their bib)
standing around in mine. Not to be elitist, there are plenty of people better
than I am after all, but you just know they may get in the way at some point,
and indeed, plenty of them would.

A first gun shot set box one on their way, six minutes later the gun shot for
box two sounded too. Off we were! Though not quite due to the bottlenecks at
the park exits. Had to walk there first, essentially. Of course I had already
pressed start on my activity. Would make pacing a bit more confusing during the
race, but I managed. Once out the park, I started overtaking more and more
people which made me fear I was starting a bit too fast. I held on though,
since it did not feel particularly fast and I blamed it on the others running
too slowly.

About two to three kilometers into the race, I passed two girls, walking next
to each other. A glance back after passing them told me they had a number in
the 1000s. In other words, they made up some time when signing up, got placed
in the best box and quickly learned they were not up to par for it. Bit silly
of them, I can only hope they filled in those times because they had never run
anything of three kilometer and had completely, zero, none experience. If that
is not the case, then they are probably just assholes. (Or got injured, in
which case I apologise, but I doubt it)

On the Louisalaan, we went through some tunnels. First time I did that. The air
felt a bit weird and like it had some static in it, if that is even possible.
That is what my skin registered though. Coming out of a tunnel is surprisingly
steep, keep that in mind if you ever need to run through one.

Also of note: the trash at the very first waterstand. I would guess over 10k
people had passed by at that point and the street was completely and utterly
littered with waterbottles. You really had to watch out where you placed your
feet to not slip over one. I can only think in horror how that must have been
like for the waves after me.

After the Louisalaan, the race winds through Ter Kameren bos where we reach the
highest point of the race, 125 meter at 7.2km. For comparison the lowest point
is 53 meter. I passed the halfway point at 45m11s (official timing, did not
know my official time when I passed it) and after that it is mostly chugging
along with the crowd till kilometer 17 and the dreaded Tervurenlaan. Dreaded
because I had already been warned about it being a killer by several other
people who had run this race. Dreaded because on the profile map it does look
dreadful enough so late in the race. Over the course of little under a
kilometer, you are climbing and climbing. As it turns out though, I was pretty
OK with that. It did not noticeably tire me out and I had nothing to fear.

While managing this final hill, the Arc de Triomphe where the finish line is
located springs into view. Do not see this as a hint to immediately start
sprinting, it is still 1.5 to 2 kilometer. I kept up my steady pace and some
final sprint to the last kilometer. Over the line and time to rest at last.
After a few minutes though, I had already regained my breath and all the signs
of exhaustion. Makes me think that I could have pushed myself harder during the
race itself. Live and learn for next year. On the other hand, as I am writing
this, my right knee is screaming for rest and has trouble sustaining my weight
if I move around. Though now I notice the general pain area seems to be a bit
lower than the knee, at the start of the shinbone. I assume the cause is still
the same though, whatever it is. I am definitely taking myself off running for
the coming week. Hope that does the trick. If not, a trip to the doctor will be
in order.

## Results

Now to the good part, the times! Good indeed. I had set out to run 1h40m, back
when I signed up and after the knee troubles the past week that remained the
goal. As mentioned before I was overtaking quite a bit of people at the start
and I feel like that did not change throughout the race. I overtook more people
than the other way around, as far as I could tell. My [official
time](http://20km.c-e.be/Classements/Classement20km2014.aspx?eventId=1138136268742672)
at the line was 1 hour 30 minutes 41 seconds. If I had known I would be so
close to breaking 1h30, I probably would have started sprinting a bit sooner.
Still overjoyed with the time though. Accompanying it is my rank, 2833rd. I
think I can conclude that next year will be a start from box one, barring any
injuries.

To finish off, a link to the activity on
[Strava](https://www.strava.com/activities/315497560) and
[RunKeeper](http://runkeeper.com/user/wardmuylaert/activity/582002809).
