---
layout: post
title: "Chester County Winter Series: Downingtown High School West"
date: 2015-12-12 18:00:00
tags: report
---

I had wanted to do a 10k race to see where I would end up these days, but had
some trouble finding one in the immediate area. Still intent on doing a race,
the girlfriend and I decided to do a 5k race that described itself as having a
"course ideal for PRs". With that in mind, she would focus on breaking 20
minutes and I just wanted to do better than my 18:50 from [Les FoulÃ©es
Joyeuses][foulees] about a month and a half earlier.

This 5k is the first race in a Winter Series of four races, but will also be
the only one I will take part in. The second is the day before I leave the USA
(and thus technically still on the table), the rest will be while I am back in
Belgium making them rather impossible.

Different about this Winter Series is the fact that the race's awards are based
on age grading, attempting to level the playing field. What I concluded from
this is that I would possibly be able to place high in the regular time based
ranking, but that I should not even consider managing top 10 age graded.

## Training and Strategy

Not much has changed compared to the 5ks I ran in October. Training still
consists of base building which has now reached about 45km per week, spread out
over four days. Tuesdays and Fridays are general aerobic. Thursdays are either
a tempo run or general aerobic followed by strides. Sundays have a long run
(for some definition of that word).

The goal for the race was to PR, so my strategy was built on that goal. The
plan was to start out at about 3:45 per km and see what I had left in the tank
near the end.

> **Mistake number one**: Thinking I ever follow my race plans.

Furthermore, perusing the list of people that had signed up gave me hopes of
finishing near the front of the pack. Two days before the race, the gf and I
were the only people in their 20s. There was one guy aged 30, all the rest were
young kids or people older than 35. Surely I could take these on. Not to
mention the people I looked up on Athlinks seemed to have times I could
definitely beat.

> **Mistake number two**: Thinking I could keep even footing with older people.

> **Mistake number three**: Thinking teenagers need not be worried about.

> **Mistake number four**: Dismissing sign ups on the morning of the race.

The weeks before the race had seen me have some trouble with my left leg,
mostly the calf, so I had decided to throw in a recovery week with volume
reduced to 80%. I decided to place this recovery week in the week of the race,
figuring it could work as a sort of taper. This went somewhat OK, though the
left leg still felt weird the day before the race and right after getting up in
the morning of the race.

## Morning of the Race

Alarm set at seven, race was at nine. Had some cereal and about a litre of
water till about 7:40. We drove over and arrived as planned at 8:30, bib pick
up, toilet break and time for a warm up which due to time constraints ended up
being only about a kilometre with some strides. The strides had me worried as
my legs did not feel right while doing them.

> **Mistake number five**: Not enough time set aside, should have arrived
> earlier.

The race would be three loops around the grounds of the high school, each being
just a tiny bit over one mile. One problem I saw during my warmup was the fact
that the route would sometimes pass over a parking lot without taking the
shortest route (a line) between entering the parking lot and exiting again.
About two or three small cones were placed on the ground to indicate you should
take a wider turn than the one you would take if you tried to efficiently go
through it. I hoped they would at least have people in position to check nobody
decided to cut off the extra ten(?) metre the bigger turn made you run.

## Race

The race director pretty randomly said "ready, go" without any time waiting for
people to actually get ready. I was caught by surprise but imagine I was not
alone. Off we went.

A guy in a blue shirt went to the front and I fell in behind him, immediately
forgetting the worries the strides had given me. A little kid in grey sprinted
a few metre out in front of us and was creating a gap, but I ignored him. No
way he would keep that up the entire race anyway. After 250 metre I glanced at
my watch which told me we were running just over 3:00 per km. That would never
work and I had to let blue shirt go, he was just too fast. Blue shirt quickly
caught up to the kid in grey, said something to him and then dropped him. I did
not see him again till the finish line.

I reigned it in and tried finding a suitable pace, but had some trouble doing
so.  While I had definitely slowed down from the 3:00 per km, I was still
running faster than I had planned in my race strategy. Slowing down also made a
pack of, I believe, five people catch up to me and settle in right behind me
about 700 metre into the race. About 1.5km in, I realised my pacing was still a
bit too fast and I tried readjusting, dropping off the front of the group. We
crossed the line in 5:41 with one of the guys pointing out "Boy, we sure are
going fast".  I could not agree more and around 2km, I had to let go of the
back of the group. Kilometre splits at 3:26 and 3:43.

About 150 metre into the third kilometre, my pace had dropped slower than four
minutes per km according to my watch. This on top of being dropped by the group
just before had me slightly worried whether my entire race was falling apart.
Even worse, someone else passed me and the kid in the grey shirt was still
about 20 metre ahead of me.

In retrospect I probably should not have worried about it as much as I did
right at that moment. The guy who passed me ended up overtaking the entire
group that dropped me and finished second, he was the only one to run negative
splits over the three laps out of the people in the top forty. The pace was low
at the beginning of that km as there was a slight uphill. Finally, the kid
seemed to, at times, take a rather liberal approach to the cone corners I
mentioned before (see below). I shouldered on, but the pace had definitely
dropped. Kilometres three and four in 3:51 and 3:58. The second lap in 6:15.

In the last kilometre, I decided I should at least push out anything I had left
in the tank and try to pass the kid in the process. I managed to slowly creep
closer and would have caught him in the second to last corner. However, this
was one of the artificial corners made by cones in a parking lot. He ignored
the cones and instead ran in a straight line towards the exit of it.  Not
daring to make a similar manoeuvre, I took the correct turn and immediately the
gap had widened considerably again. I find it a bit of a pity, but in the end
do not care too much about it. I am mostly trying to beat myself in these
races.

Turning into the final straight, the clock was nearing 18 minutes. I pushed out
a final sprint, but as I crossed the line I knew I had just missed out on sub
18. I expressed my disappointment with an emphatic "Fuck!" one step past the
line. Struggled to the nearest place out of the way of others to drop
myself on the ground and remained there till I regained my breath.

## Results

The official results confirm me missing out on sub 18, placing me at 18:01 and
ninth to cross the line. The kid in grey managed 17:59, impressive with or
without inventive corner taking. The people in the group that dropped me
managed times between 17:06 and 17:41. The guy that overtook us all and managed
to run negative splits ended up second in 16:58. Blue shirt, finally, was way
ahead of the rest with 15:34.

As usual, [official results][official] and [Strava activity][strava].

[official]: http://www.runccrs.com/ccrs-winter-series-race-1-12122015/
[foulees]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2015-10-25-les-foulees-joyeuses %}
[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/448936861
