---
layout: post
title: "Belgian Championship 10 km road"
date: 2016-08-06 21:00:00
tags: report
---

For the first time ever, a Belgian Championship was to be held for the 10
kilometre road race.  To do so, an established street race was picked out and
the Belgian Championship would just be held as a part of that race. That race
was the Optiek Sonck Streetrace in Lokeren which has been organised for the
past 33 years.

In a moment of "why the fuck not", I decided I would take part in it. I did not
stand a chance, but I was curious to compare myself to the better runners in
Belgium on an equal playing field.  Add to the fact that this race was flat and on
actual roads, both of which I had not experienced in a 10 km race yet. I
figured this could be a nice moment to set a new PR. Only downside: the race
was held in the afternoon. At the start of August. I suck in warm weather.

## Training

For the past two months, I have just been doing some base building. The main
goal of which is trying to get used to some more weekly distance. I have been
stagnating a bit around 66 km per week as I try to iron out some small pains
and niggles before pushing further. This base building has been mostly easy
runs with a tempo on Thursday every second week and a bunch of strides added to
the Thursday of those other weeks.

My tapering was limited to race week. Monday was a day off, as usual. Tuesday
was shortened by a few kilometre to 11.5 with some strides and 1200 metre at
the hoped race pace. Wednesday was an 8 km recovery run and Thursday another
day off. Friday was 5 km recovery with a few strides at the end. Saturday was
race day.

## Course details

Start and finish is at the local stadium. Two loops are run on the streets of
the village. Half of the loop follows the river that runs through the town.
This river, or rather, its bridges, make for the only small pieces of
"elevation" in the race. There are some patches of cobblestones, the
nice-to-run-on well maintained kind, as well as about half a kilometre (total)
of gravel. All in all, nothing to be worried about.

The only actually worrying thing: there is virtually no shaded area to hide you
from the sun beating down on you.

## Goals and Strategy

Due to no specific preparation, I had nothing to lose going into this race.
During the 1200m @ race pace attempt on Tuesday, I kept a sub 4:00 pace easily
without really raising my heart rate. I have also been meaning to go under 40
minutes for the 10 km. Things seemed to be neatly falling into place, so I set
a goal of going for a sub 4:00 pace and just seeing if I could carry it to the
end.

If nothing else, I figured I should be able to PR easily enough. My PR was
42:47 from [a race][ulb] back in April.

## Day of the Race

I tried sleeping in a bit, but mostly failed at that. The girlfriend and I had
some pasta leftovers and slowly got ready. We had to take the train to Lokeren,
but due to the race not starting until 15:15, we had plenty of time to get
ready. The weather seemed OK, it was actually clouded. By the time we headed
out though, the clouds were already mostly gone and the temperature had climbed
some.

By the time we were doing our warmup, the sun was properly beating down and the
temperature had reached lower mid 20s. That little jog already had me sweating
like a madman and I knew the race itself would be suffering.

## Race

Because of all the actual fast people present, I did not start anywhere near
the front. As we started off, this turned out to be advantageous in that I was
unable to do my usual much too fast start. There was not really any way through
and I just followed the crowd till we left the stadium. By that point, the road
was wide enough for any manoeuvring and quickly people found their spot. The
crowd's usual stringing out happened and people settled into their pace.

I quickly realised I was going to have trouble keeping the pace sub 4:00. I
started going slightly slower, but still managed to keep on passing people,
which helped morale.  After we crossed the river a first time, we were unto a
narrow gravel path. I had to go on to the adjacent grass a few times to pass
people and just hoped there were no hidden holes anywhere. Luckily this did not
last long and once we crossed the river back to the original side, there were
not enough people around me any more for it to matter. The road wound next to
the river for a few 100 metre more before it turned away so we could loop back
to the stadium.

> Kilometre one in 3:56, two in 4:05, and three in 4:07.

Around the three kilometre mark was a water stand. At least, that is what I
expected. Instead, they were offering wet sponges. The idea looked nice in
theory, but I did not feel it was efficient in refreshing me. I would have
rather had a cup of water and emptied it on my head directly.

We turned left and on this street there was a small amount of shade on the
right side. Everybody headed straight for the shaded side. Alas, it
was not meant to be as a few 100 metre further we were directed onto the
sidewalk on the left side of the street. This part of the street was not closed
down and we had to turn left eventually anyway.

Before long, we were back in the centre of the village and there was more of a
crowd cheering us on. We passed the entrance of the stadium and started the
second loop.  Again we were offered a sponge, which I used, but here also a cup
of water, which I also simply emptied on my head. Meanwhile I had been trying
to slow myself down a bit more again, as my heart rate had happily climbed into
the low 180s. The highest I have seen my heart rate ever so far has been 190, so
180s get me to pay attention.

> Kilometre four in 4:14, five in 4:17, six in 4:19.

I chugged on and slowly caught up to people here and there. It was nice not to
be on the receiving end of that for once. The sun also disappeared behind a
cloud for about five minutes, giving some relief. I crossed the river twice and
passed the sponge stand once more.

Turning left onto the street with the little bit of shade on the right side, I
noticed nobody was running on the shaded side this time around.  The extra
metres you had to run for the rather small gain were not worth the effort and
so I too continued without avoiding the sun.

As we entered the final two kilometre, I decided I might as well let the heart
rate continue its upward creep and sped up again.  We went through the village
centre, and the crowds, and twice I almost hit a crossing spectator. The first
one was a little girl crossing from my right hand side to my left hand side.
She only looked to her right before crossing. I will forgive her, she must have
been five or so and all adults nearby were trying to make her get out of the
way. The second one was some 30-40 year old idiot who decided to cross nowhere
near the official crossing. Upon spotting me and realising he was right in
my path, he apparently thought it best not to really move at all. Fuck that guy.

> Kilometre seven in 4:20, eight in 4:17, nine in 4:14.

During the final kilometre, my heart rate averaged 188 (as mentioned before, my
max is 190). I was pushing out whatever I had left. I passed one more guy with
about 700 metre to go, he looked like his body had given up, he was going
pretty slow. I reentered the track and remembered that I could not just sprint
to the finish, but instead had to first do another lap. I managed to kick out a
sub 4:00 pace again, but was oh so glad once I crossed the line.

## Results

My time was nowhere near sub 40, but I did break my PR by over a minute. The
[watch says 41:35][strava], the official results do not seem to take chip time
into account and put me at [41:44][results]. That might have to do with it
being a championship: with all the different age categories they want to
have first over the line = winner. I ranked 159th out of 496 participants. The
girlfriend ran it in 44:38, making her 39th out of 121 females.

I cannot say I was close to the winner, he did it in 30:06. Nor the female
winner for that matter, who managed 35:11. I expected as much. A result that
did catch me by surprise however, was a certain Eddy Vierendeels. This 64 year
old guy ran the 10 km in 36:41. When I saw that, I googled him. Turns out he is
the former world record holder in that age category despite only having started
running in 2002, when he was 50. Welp, talk about possibly wasted potential.

I will likely take the coming week off, get rid of those pains and niggles
properly before looking forward towards a fall goal. I am not quite sure yet
what that will be exactly, but am currently leaning towards making a more
organised effort at a sub 40 10 km. If I find another flat one. If I do not
immediately find an exact goal, I will just continue my base building regime. I
sort of like the simplicity of it right now.

[results]: http://www.chronorace.be/Classements/Classement.aspx?eventId=1186531960181915&mode=large&IdClassement=13824
[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/666570627
[ulb]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-04-17-les-10km-de-l-ulb %}
