---
layout: post
title: "Les Hivernales du RCB \"10k\" - Prize Winning Crash and Burn"
date: 2016-02-07 18:00:00
tags: report
---

A sobering experience.

In terms of races, I have been living on a bit of a cloud the past months.  I
have only been taking part in 5 km races since June and each one has left me
with a satisfied feeling. Be it a PR or a nice placing, things were going good.

With my training reaching longer distances again, it was time to have another
go at racing a 10 km. The one time I raced it before was a disaster in terms of
pacing. It was also my first race ever, so that probably is somewhat of an
explanation. This time, I would redeem myself.

## Course details

To my annoyance, the course is actually around 9.2 km long. This is quite
clearly stated on their site, though the event still is called a 10 km. No
chance of setting a PR here.

Though honestly, even if it were a proper 10 km, this would still not be a
course to set PRs on. The first two km are somewhat flat, but after that a
first hill starts.  This first hill is 1.2 km long and averages about 5% (dixit
Strava). Once you have suffered through this, you can catch your breath on an
800 metre downhill. Hope you do, because from 4 km to 4.6 km is another climb,
this one around 3%.

You are then presented with another opportunity to maybe recover a bit as
things stay flat till 5.3 km. Another hill of just over 3% brings you to the
sixth km. A short downhill delivers you at the bottom of the final climb. This
one is only about 400 metre, but the gradient is around 4%. You can possibly
place a bit of a kick here because once you crest the hill at 6.7 km, it is
pretty much downhill till the finish line.

## Strategy

My belief before the race was that conquering the first hill was really the
only challenge I should properly plan for. Reason for this is that that first
hill makes the rest of the course look peanuts when looking at the course
profile.  If I had written things out like I did for the previous section,
maybe I would have planned differently. As it is, I only considered the big
hill and dismissed the rest of the course as "flat enough".

With that explanation in mind, my plan was to start around 4:00 per km pace,
take it easier on that first big hill and then try to get closer to said pace
again. I also knew of two other people taking part, let us call them A and B,
who both should be around my pace. If I were to spot either of them, I might be
able to stick with them, making the pacing slightly easier.

## Training

I have been working on making 50 km running per week the new normal as well as
getting ready for the start of my 20 km door Brussel training cycle which will
start the second week of March. The weeks leading up to this race were: 50.6 km
(included a 5 km race), 40.3 km (an 80% volume week), 52.2 km, and 55 km
(including the distance I ran on race day). This was always spread out over four
days. I feel like I should also point out these are the highest distance weeks
I have ever done, so I imagine my body may be needing some extra getting used
to still.

Not much is going on in terms of workouts, my second run of the week sees
either strides or a tempo run. This is still more of a base building period
that I hope will put me safely at the start of my 20 km training cycle.

In terms of things besides actual running, I have been doing a bit of the
[Myrtl routine][myrtl] to help against a weird feeling right hip. I think it
has been working, it has been feeling better again.

As is likely evident from my weekly distances, there was no tapering for this
race, though I did do the last run before the race (11 km on Friday) at a
recovery pace.

## Morning of the Race

I had some trouble falling asleep the night before and ended up with only six
hours of sleep. Had a bowl of cornflakes and a bunch of water and left to take
the metro with the girlfriend, who would be doing the other event today, the 20
km. Once there, we lost a lot of time standing in line for the toilet. By the
time we got through all that, there was no time left for a proper warm up so we
went to line for the start.

The 20 km and the 10 km started at the same time, adding up to about 1700
people. Most people were already in place and I had some trouble moving more to
the front. Eventually I gave up and waited around the tenth row or so. It was a
relatively wide street as well so all in all I decided I would need to do a bit
of weaving in the first kilometre or two. I did not see B while waiting for
the start signal, but I spotted A a few lines before me. He could be a
target of the weaving.

## Race

A horn sounded and off we went. I immediately noticed that my failure to move
more to the front before the start was a pain now. The people around me started
noticeably slower and I had to dodge, squeeze, and use my elbows creatively. As
soon as possible, I moved outside of the stream of runners and into the (car
free) opposing lane so I could speed up without worries. After two right turns
I did a similar thing using the sidewalk. As I approached the end of the first
km, things were not as crowded any more and I also spotted B. I crept closer
to her, finally falling in step aside her after one km. Grunting "Hey" and
matching her pace, we continued and reached the start of the first hill.

> Splits kilometres one and two: 4:04, 4:05.

Feeling pretty good, I moved in front of her and set my own pace. Things were
naturally going slower than the previous splits, but in my mind I kept the
effort reasonably similar. I also figured the downhill right after the climb
would be sufficient if I did push a bit too hard. I crested the hill and was
glad the hardest part of the race was behind me. I did not look back, but
assumed B was still close enough behind me, which would validate my "I went up
it at the correct pace" assumption.

This turned out to be somewhat true as she raced past me halfway down the hill.
Going by her speed, I must have had created somewhat of a gap going up the hill
after all. I figured it would be easy enough to follow her now, it was downhill
after all. Looking back at my heart rate however, this might have not given me
the recovery my body could have used at this point. She was clearly much more
efficient at running down the hill, easily making up what she had lost in the
uphill. The fourth kilometre was past us and so was the downhill.

> Splits three and four: 4:32, 3:58.

The next climb started and I noticed I had a bit more trouble keeping up.
Around this point, we also split away from those running the 20 km, removing
some of the people around me. B was slowly breaking away and I gave up trying
to match her pace as it was beginning to give me issues. Looking back at the
heart rate data, it went up even more on this part, but sadly enough I had not
given my heart rate a look yet. The flat section that followed gave me some
respite, but I already saw the next hill looming beyond it, which did not help
my motivation. I pushed myself over it and survived the sixth kilometre.

> Splits five and six: 4:49, 4:32.

As the watch beeped, I decided to switch the screen to show just my heart rate.
Clearly my body was not liking my pacing, so maybe running purely by heart rate
would work better. Garmin's colourful display was showing dark red: my heart
rate was close to my maximum heart rate (that is, the maximum I have been able
to spot so far, anyway). I swore at myself for not having it open from the very
first minute.  I tried slowing down a bit, but also told myself that the long
downhill towards the finish would be nearby now. If I reached that point, then
it would be smooth sailing. Reality disagreed.

As I was going up the final hill, a side stitch hit me. I could not remember
the last time I had one of these, but there it was. I hoped that my slowing
down would make it go away so I could still make the most out of that long
downhill.

> Split seven: 4:24.

I reached the blissful downhill, the difficult parts were all behind me, my
heart rate started slowly going down, I regained my breath pretty much
completely. Just one thing remained.

That damned side stitch.

As it turns out, having a side stitch makes it really difficult to run at a
decent pace, even when going downhill. I could not speed up the way one should
on this part of the course and people started passing me left and right. There
was nothing I could do and I dared not switch away from the heart rate view of
my watch lest I see the disappointment of my total time.

Of course, I could not avoid that forever. As I neared the line, I saw their
clock ticking past 40 minutes and knew today was a failure. I jogged past the
line and munched down some of their fruit, cookies, and tea. I briefly talked
to A as well as B and then went for my "cooldown" of eight something
kilometre to reach my quota for the day.

> Splits eight and nine: 4:48, 4:36.

## Results

My [Strava activity][strava] and the [official results][results] for your
viewing pleasure. My official time ended up being 40:24, 61st out of 848. Over
two minutes behind B and over three minutes behind A. I would say I lost
about 15 places in those last few kilometres of downhill. This following image
is quite telling, it shows my time compared to some others on Strava who took part
in the race. I am the red line.

![redline]

This race definitely did not go as planned. Whining about it will not help though,
so it is best to see what can be learned from it and move on.

Main take away is, I think, that racing only by feeling is not a great idea if
you do not have experience in the distance. I really should have kept an eye on
my heart rate as well, then I might have noticed sooner that I needed to slow
down. For my next 10 km race, on 17 April, I will try out some different data
fields on my watch. I have two screens on my watch with three fields each. I
will try overall distance, lap pace and current heart rate on the first (main)
one. I will still have to think what I will put on screen two to complement
this while also keeping it useful as a "backup main screen", though
realistically I will not be actively changing screens during a race.

Secondly it will be useful to write out in words how the profile looks like
before the race. This forces me to think deeper about it then "oh that looks
quite alright", an approach that failed here. Only time will tell whether that
is sufficient of course.

Finally, if I had ignored B on that first major downhill, maybe things would
have gone slightly better. This feels secondary to the first point though. If I
had been going too slow, then following her *would* have been the right choice.

To close, I must address the prize winning part of the title. The girlfriend
and I hung around for the podiums afterwards and dropped our bib numbers into a
raffle they were apparently holding as well. To my surprise, my number was
called and I won some beer: four bottles of Rochefort and a Rochefort glass.
This also happens to be my favourite beer, so that made it a happy day after
all. My self destruction had not been completely useless.

[hivernales]: http://leshivernalesdurcb.blogspot.be/
[results]: http://www.toptiming.be/2016/02/les-hivernales-du-rcb-93km-watermael.html
[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/488054858
[myrtl]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2GLrKr54yA0
[redline]: https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1700/24887689966_eef93bde0e_o.png
