---
layout: post
title: "Les 10km de l'ULB"
date: 2017-04-23 21:00:00
tags:
- report
- volunteer
---

A bit of a change from the usual! Due to injury-ridden January and February, my
fitness is nowhere near where I would want it to be. A pity for my spring
racing season. The 2017 edition of the first race I ever ran, [Les 10km de
l'ULB][10kulb] was coming up and I knew I was not going to get in a shape to
speak of. I would not be happy with whatever result I could run. Instead, I
decided to volunteer.

## Training

The organisation sent us (the girlfriend decided to also volunteer) a list of
keywords for questions we might receive from runners. I made sure to study
it/read it a few times as well as looking at the map of the area a few times to
make sure I knew what was where (think bag drop off, bib pick up, ...). Since
we were in the list for bib handout, the girlfriend also practised her
listening comprehension of French numbers.

## Race Day

The race would start at 10:30. The organisation had asked us to be present at
8:00. Some others had to be there at 6:00 already, so that could have been
worse. We woke up at 6:00 and did not care too much about our morning routine.
The organisation said that there would be some croissants for us, but my
experience with relying on a breakfast like that is that I am usually left
hungry. So, I had a bowl of muesli. We calmly got ready and were out the door
a little past seven. The girlfriend went by public transportation and I biked.
We both arrived nicely at 8:00, within a few minutes of one another.

We were given a T-shirt and one croissant each. Good thing I had that bowl of
muesli. The girlfriend was happy to also make use of their coffee. Nobody
really told us what to do so we stood around for a bit. I saw some people
offloading fruits and drinks, so I helped them for a bit. After that it was a
bit more standing around till a lady started placing cutting boards on the
tables. We started cutting oranges in four, did a few 100 of those. When the
oranges were taken care off, we started on the bananas. Bananas was just a
matter of cutting it in the middle so that people would not needlessly take too
much. The girlfriend and I made good time on the bananas. She placed them in a
row, I cut ten of them at once and placed them in the bins. I feel like the two
of us did half of the bananas they provided.

Once more we were out of a job. Nobody told us anything, but the mail they had
sent had stated we would be doing bib handout. So we walked to the bib stands,
but all seats were already covered by other volunteers and nobody seemed to be
in charge. We wandered around some more, not quite sure what to do. We ended up
at the T-shirt stand. People that had paid 10 euro extra (sign up fee without
the T-shirt was 6 euro for students and 10 euro for others) could come fetch
their T-shirt there. We saw there were some empty seats at this stand and just
one person behind the counter. We asked him if he could use a hand and joined
him. Someone else also joined us, so we ended up with four volunteers on a
pretty easy job. There never was a long queue to get T-shirts and half of the
people passing by seemed to just be asking for directions to the bib stand or
the changing rooms.

As the start time neared, our area got emptier and emptier. When the start was
about to be given, we went outside our stand to be on some higher ground and
see the people go. Funny in a way how *long* of a time there is between the
shot and the people all the way at the back even being able to move.  When I am
in the thick of things I never really notice that as much.

After the big crowd had left for the run, some latecomers still passed us
running to the start line.  We packed up most of our stand and walked back to
the area of the fruits and drinks.  As you can expect with a 10 km, there is
about 30 minutes of nothing happening between the start and the first finisher.
We used this time to make sure all the water, sports drink, etc were ready for
the finishers.  Even after the first finisher things are not very active since
the bigger crowd is of course another 10+ minutes behind him.

And then things got a bit messy. More and more people poured over the finish
line and headed to our stand, grabbing everything. After a while of this,
someone of the organisation told us that the finishers were only supposed to
grab one drink.  Bit late on that info. Never mind that the food and drink
stand was 20 metre long, people could easily grab something in several
positions. With over 3000 participants arriving in such a small space, it is
hard to keep track.

In the end, the last few 100 people that passed the line were in for
disappointment. We ran out of everything. I do not know if this happens often
in races in Belgium, I am closer to the front usually. A downside of our cheap
(compared to the USA) races, perhaps? I am not blaming the runners though. I
know how I am in that position, I just grab and drink and munch. Well, I am
blaming *some* of them. I saw one lady grab a few sports drinks and just put
them in a bag unopened. Bitch.

## Results

The race for the podium was decided in a three way sprint, finishing in 33:36,
33:40, and 33:43.  First female came in at 39:47. In total, over 3200 people
took part, with another few 100 extra sign ups that were a no show. We watched
some of the podium ceremonies, then went to a nearby supermarket for some food.
By the time we came back, it did not look like clean up would be soon to start.
We did not feel like waiting around much longer, so I biked back home while the
girlfriend ran via another route.

It felt nice to help out and see a race from a different perspective than my
usual one. If you have interest in a race, but cannot actually take part,
definitely consider volunteering. As for me, I do like the running part better
and hope to just run the races I am interested in.

[10kulb]: http://www.10kmulb.org/
