---
layout: post
title: "Jaarmarktjogging Jette"
date: 2017-08-27 12:00:00
tags:
- report
- podium
---

I found out there was a small race on walking distance from my house, the
Jaarmarktjogging Jette 4k and 8k. It is located in a park I have run through
hundreds of times. I could not let that slip by. I signed up for the 4k,
despite the lack of shape I am in.

## Training

I have mostly been in a sort of base building mode as of late. Sick of getting
injured more often than I want to, I decided to just take it easy and add
distance till I reach something reasonable. Reasonable in my mind would be
about 70 km per week, for the time being. After I would have reached that very
comfortably for some time, I figure I could add some more intensity back into
the grind.

However, my body once more decided differently. After coming back home from
vacation around the start of August, I had been mostly comfortable around 60 km
per week.  I thought I would push it a bit further till 65 km and then slowly
start adding in some Tempo workouts in light of a likely half at the end of
October.

However, those plans never got executed. About 10 days after returning, I got
injured at my right knee/upper shin area. The right calf had been tight for
several days before that, but I had been ignoring it with the idea it would fix
itself. It did not and instead I got the short end of the stick. In retrospect,
I am just blaming myself for not listening to my body. That is sounding all too
familiar. I _think_ my legs got extra tired from my return to bike commuting.
If only I had considered that beforehand.

The weeks before the race, I ended up running 62.8km, 40.8km, and 45.1km. I was
somewhat pushing through the injury by keeping my daily distance very low,
enabling me to react to any developing pain. In the week of this race however,
I decided I was balancing a very narrow ledge by pushing through pain and
injury. After running 8.8 on Tuesday and 5.1 on Wednesday, I did not run till
Sunday, the day of the race.  Instead, I swam some on Thursday and Saturday.
That had been a _long_ time ago.

## Course Details

Despite it being in a park I have seen more often than I can count, I had no
idea what to actually expect of the race. They do not have a website, nor is a
route displayed anywhere prominently. So this one I did not know about till
after the fact.

For the first 1.5 km you are net gaining about 36 metre of elevation.  You
start out on a brick road for about 200-300 metre. After that you get packed
earth and earth-with-rocks. Some parts have roots sticking out, a lot of parts
have the rocks sticking out. It is not until 900 metre in that most of that
elevation is gained in a series of a steep uphill-some downhill-more steep
uphill. At 1.5 km a downhill starts. You are briefly diverted onto a grassy
patch for 200 metre. The grass is long enough that you really have to watch out
not to twist your ankle from hidden bumps and holes. Afterwards you continue
descending till 2.3km in. You take a sharp right and have to run on wonderful
Belgian cobbles overgrown by grass. Each of the cobbles is pointing up weirdly
of course. From here on out it is a mostly flat affair though. At 2.6 km you
are back on brick road for the rest of the run. There are some turns, four of
which a bit too sharp. The last of them is a π turn about 600 metre out from
the finish. After that, you are on the home stretch.

## Goals and Strategy

Last year's results indicated I might place well (top 5 or better), but the
preceding weeks had mostly dashed those hopes. I figured I would just race and
make sure to not leave anything in the tank.

## Race

The girlfriend and I walked over around 9:15, got there by 9:30, got our bib,
and went for a bit of a warmup. When lining up I ended up around the fourth
row, but most people there looked decently fast. No old ladies or little kids
at the front. Both the 4 km and the 8 km started at the same time.

Right after the start has been given, I find myself veering to the outside to
pass some people. I also immediately see someone create a small gap in the first 100
metre. I assume he must be doing the 4 km. I fall in with a group of about
seven or eight people and for a bit the feeling of running in a pack is
elating.  It does not last long. At about 500 metre in I reckon they are going
faster than I can handle. I let them run off.

Around the 1 km mark, most of it had been a slight climb so far, there is a
short steep uphill. It zaps the pace out of me and someone that had been
closing in on me, passes me. He looks to be wearing a cycling jersey (with
bottle holders). I never see him again. There are another two such uphills in
the next few 100 meter and they ruin my pace every time. Right before cresting
the main hill of this race, somebody in a purple-blue shirt passes me. Turns
out to be a guy that added me on Strava a week or two before. Right after
cresting the hill, someone in a bright yellow shirt passes me. <!-- though that
bright yellow does not appear on the photos placed online. I wonder if his
front is differently coloured from the back. -->

With the downhill starting, I figure I can easily keep up or reel them back in.
I am usually better at these. To my surprise, this is not at all the case. I
manage to keep them in sight, but cannot close the gap. Turning onto the few
100 meter of grassy underground suppresses the speed again, but my "opponents"
seem equally affected. After this we keep going downhill uneventfully.

With 1.5 km to go, there's about 300 meter of bad cobbles with grass in
between.  I am a bit wary of these and slow down some while crossing them.
Doing so makes me lose more terrain on purple and yellow shirt. Worse, I am
hearing someone behind me closing in by the end of the cobble section. I do not
know what my position in the 4 km race is by now. There are about 10 people
ahead of me, if I were to guess (later counting with the photos tells me there
are 12 people ahead of me), but I do not know who is doing the 4 and who the 8.

Less than 1 km from the line, we briefly cross paths with those ahead of us. I
take the opportunity to look for 4 km bibs and spot spot two of them. Adding
the quick starter to that (whom I had not seen since the start), that places me
in fourth position at best. At a π turn, I manage to glance at the guy behind
me. He too has a 4 km bib. In other words: with about 600 metre to go I find
myself battling for (possibly) fourth position. Whether it really is for fourth
place or, say, tenth, I do not know at the time, but battle for it I will.

I start speeding up, but with 400 metre to go I realise I am overshooting a
bit.  I manage to dial myself back in so that I can keep up the effort till the
finish line. (Hey, look, I actually learned from one of my past mistakes)  I
listen carefully too, trying to anticipate the other 4 km runner coming from
behind.  Nothing gives that indication. In the last 100 metre I realise I have
got this and bother throwing a moose sign at the photographer (which he ends up
missing).

As I reach the line, I hear the announcer say I am *third*. I am surprised and
confused, but most of all I am dead. I go to lie on the grass for a while to
recover.

## Results

I finished in 15:15 according to the official [results]. [My GPS][strava] makes
14:54 out of that. Inclined to believe the latter. Regardless, I finish over a
minute behind the first (14:09) and second (14:14) place: the two guys whose
bib I read. The girlfriend was not in the mood for a fast race and finished
second female in 18:09, 56 seconds behind the first female.

The 8 km was dominated by the fast starter who won it in 25:45, nearly a  minute
in front of the second. Purple shirted Strava friend finished 10th in 29:15.

I think it is clear that a lot of the fast people were doing the 8 km instead
of the 4 km. Nevertheless, I am quite happy with "podiuming". I even got a 18
euro gift card for some running magazine. Yay.

*Note: Both races were short. Think of it as an "around that distance" race.
Welcome to Belgium.*

## Future

The girlfriend had the idea of doing a flat half in the Netherlands at the end
of October. I was OK with following her plan.  We have not signed up for it yet
(there is still quite some time). Possibly a good thing: the girlfriend is
hesitant about even bothering with it due to being out of shape. Rather: not in
the shape she wants to be. This somewhat affects the immediate future, but not
too much. I think I will just focus on base building and remaining injury free
for the coming months: steady distance, some strides, eventually some LT type
workouts. I still want to eventually get to 70km a week while remaining in one
piece.  Besides that, I intend to keep on swimming twice a week as well
(despite my body not being very good at handling chlorine).

In terms of races, I feel like I might have to make up some sort of A goal for
fall/winter now that the half will likely be cut. For now, these are some race
options:

- 1/10: Jogging '80, the 10k. Only one on this list I will definitely do. (They
  also offer 5, 15, and 20)
- 22/10: Brussels Canal Run (has 4k, 8k, and 12k)
- 11/11: Jogging van de Vrede (also 4, 8, and 12)
- 20/11: Foulées Joyeuses (5k and 10k)

None of them scream "A goal" to me though. Maybe that is for the best, then I
can more easily focus on just the base.

[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1154299196
[results]: http://jette.irisnet.be/nl/vrije-tijd/sport/resultaten-jogging-2017
