---
layout: post
title: "Fall 2018"
date: 2018-08-08 18:00:00
tags: planning
---

Setting an actual goal for this fall: a half marathon the first weekend of
November. This will be the first time I race a half marathon. To keep me
honest, I am taking a "snapshot" of my current plan towards it. I will have to
see how dedicated I end up being in terms of following my plan. Not getting
injured remains the top priority.

## Goal

My main point of comparison is the [20km door Brussel][bxl20k] race I ran the
last weekend of May. I finished that one in 1:27:59. Taking that at face value
predicts a half marathon time of around 1h33. However, the half marathon will
be a flat course (the 20 km is not) and the weather should be considerably
cooler. Someone I know will also be running this race and is aiming for sub 90.
I reckon I probably should too. Obviously this is just a goal I set now, I will
have to adjust it depending on how the training goes and how I feel closer to
the race.

## The Plan

As "official" cut-off for the plan, I picked the start to be the coming week.
This makes the plan a pretty standard 12 weeks long. In making the plan, I
wrote down the total distance and workouts for every week, but have not yet
filled in the further details. I will do those as the week comes closer so I
can plan the runs in function of the rest of my life. By default, the workouts
will be Tuesday or Friday. Sunday is the long run. Recovery runs on Thursday
and Saturday, usually with strides thrown in. Just a regular run on Wednesday.

Likely odd in comparison to usual plans is that I do not do any building up in
total distance as the plan progresses. Every week that is not a recovery week
or taper week will be 80 kilometre total distance. Reasoning for this is that I
have been doing several 75 km weeks and was in the process of building up to 80
km for the first time ever. Coincidentally I will be hitting this as I start
the plan. Since I will be doing more workouts again, I am sure it would not be
healthy to keep building distance during the plan. I also did not feel like
dropping down a bunch in distance again just to create a peaking of distance in
the plan. Thus I have ended up in this position, where I will just be doing 80
km most weeks in the coming plan. If that leaves me less peaked on race day, so
be it.

To be specific a default week will look as follows.

| Day | Type | Distance |
|:----|:-----|---------:|
| Monday | Rest | 0 |
| Tuesday | Workout | 12 |
| Wednesday | Regular | 14 |
| Thursday | Recovery and strides | 10 |
| Friday | Workout | 14 |
| Saturday | Recovery and strides | 10 |
| Sunday | Long | 20 |

The plan essentially has three "phases". The two first phases have three
workout weeks followed by one recovery week.  I am not 100% sure I will be able
to handle three weeks in a row. If it turns out I cannot, I will have to drop a
workout here-and-there. Those are worries I will not consider too much until I
face them though. The final phase is two workout weeks followed by two taper
weeks towards the race.

Finally for each phase I give a breakdown of what I have planned in it as
workouts. I will be using Jack Daniels terminology for workouts, see his book
for details.

### Phase One: Weeks 1 through 4

| Week | Workouts | Distance |
|------|----------|----------|
| 1 | 10 minute race, strides, long run | 80 |
| 2 | Repetition, Tempo, strides, long run | 80 |
| 3 | Parkrun (5k race), tempo, strides, long run | 80 |
| 4 | strides | 60 |

The 10 minute race should be interesting and if paced right give some sort of
indication for my training paces. Downside is it is a time trial so the mental
game of pushing myself will be difficult too. The parkrun at the end of the
cycle will likely be slow due to exhaustion, but I want to take advantage of
being in a place that has parkruns.

### Phase Two: Weeks 5 through 8

| Week | Workouts | Distance |
|------|----------|----------|
| 5 | Interval/Hard, Tempo, strides, long run | 80 |
| 6 | Interval/Hard, Tempo, strides, long run | 80 |
| 7 | Likely 5k-10k race, Tempo, strides(, long run?) | 80 |
| 8 | strides | 60 |

This will likely be suffering, especially since week 7 promises to be a busy
week in terms of my work.

### Phase Three: Weeks 9 through 12

| Week | Workouts | Distance |
|------|----------|----------|
| 9 | Interval/Hard, Tempo, strides, long run | 80 |
| 10 | 10ish km tune up race, tempo, strides(, long run?) | 80 |
| 11 | Repetitions, Tempo, strides, long run | 70 |
| 12 | RACE, strides, a Tempo or Race effort | 60 |

The tune up should give me a final idea of what I can expect in the half
marathon. I hope the taper is tapery enough. I might adjust distance downwards
still if it feels like it might be needed. If I recall, the goal in taper is to
let the body rest, but do a higher intensity thing often enough to stay in peak
shape.

## Inspiration

The plan is heavily based on things I have read in "Daniels' Running Formula"
by Jack Daniels and in "Faster Road Racing" by Pete Pfitzinger and Philip
Latter.

[bxl20k]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-05-27-20km-door-brussel %}
