---
layout: post
title: "Brickfields parkrun #33"
date: 2018-09-01 12:00:00
tags:
- report
- podium
- victory
- road
---

I happened to be in Dublin, Ireland for the first weekend of September and
figured I should make use of there actually being [parkruns][parkrun] there,
the free weekly 5k races. I had done my first and only parkrun back in [January
2016][becktonparkrun]. It was fun, but since we do not have them in Belgium, I
did not have the chance to do another one since. Dublin has a few, so I quickly
decided I should partake.  I chose [Brickfields][brickfieldsparkrun] for no
other reason than that it was easily accessible from where I was staying.
Luckily, the login and barcode I still had from that previous parkrun works at
every parkrun in every country.

## Training

Through summer I had slowly pushed my weekly distance from about 70 km to 80
km.  At the end of July I also started adding some T (Tempo, Threshold, LT,
whatever you want to call it) and R work as defined by Jack Daniels. Nothing
too radical.  My 80 km weeks I tried to split up as follows: off, 12 with R,
14, 10, 14 with T, 10, 20.  Since the parkrun is on a Saturday morning, I moved
every run in that week forward by one day.  The parkrun came at the end of a
third 80 km week. After three such weeks, I plan in a recovery week.  For the
parkrun itself no special accommodations were made besides dropping the R work
and moving the T work to Tuesday.

## Course Details

The course is pretty flat and no too sharp corners. You do their loop four
times. At the end of the fourth one, you turn onto a final straight to the
finish line. Mapping it out myself, I feel like it might run a bit longer than
the usual 5 km and going by my watch afterwards, I am inclined to fully believe
that.

## Goals and Strategy

I had taken a look at some previous results in order to come up with a goal.
Depending on the week it looked like it could be impossible for me to "win", a
certainty for me to "win", or a nice battle. In all cases, the "podium" seemed
easily attainable. I use quotes since there is no podium or prizes and they
refer to the "winner" as the "first finisher" to avoid the idea that all the
rest would be losers.

I decided I would just start and hang with the top few, then evaluate how hot
the pace was. I was mildly worried I would explode anyway due to being at the
end of a third high week, but I was OK with that risk in order to have a fun
race.

## Getting There

The girlfriend and I had flown into Dublin the day before and tried to be in
bed early enough. She was not going to go to the parkrun, but it helps that we
were both tired from the work week anyway. From where we were staying I just
had to jog a few kilometre. Perfect as a warm-up. I did that and a loop of the
route to have a bit of an idea.

The park had a toilet which I quickly used before going to the start area and
keeping warm with some dynamic stretches and some strides.  The race director
held a little speech with the usual warnings as well as asking for first timers
or people from abroad.  After that was done, he said the sub 20 people should
probably line up at the front and then started the race without much ceremony.

## Race

I started from the first row, if you can even call it that, and went out at a
tempo-ish pace. By feel of course when you are just starting. I figured there
would be some sort of group forming at the front quickly enough. I felt just
one person a stride behind me on my left, but figured that was plenty.

Maybe 100 metre into the race however, it felt like that person was fading.
Another 100 m further, I realised nobody was close. I looked behind me and saw
a kid quite a ways back already, who must have been the one right behind me. I
was all alone and there was still about 4.8 km to go. A bit demotivated, I
settled into a sort of T-effort and realised I would not be racing much today.

In the second lap I started overtaking people, but there tended to be enough
room to do that safely. I was not in a hurry anyway. Some people yelled
encouragements at me, I tried my best to reciprocate. At some point a volunteer
took a (blurry) picture of me. I did a moose sign when coming closer in hopes
she would take a picture, but instead she just started laughing.

I cruised on like this to the finish line and "won" my first race. It would
have felt more satisfying if some competition had shown up. Still, I had fun.

## Results

[Their results][results] have me at 19:19, which matches up with my [Strava].
The second place guy finished over two minutes behind me. The third place guy
almost three minutes, but his age grading is better. I still have a lot of room
for improvement. Hopefully.

Since my watch (and earlier mapping) indicate a distance of over 5 km, I figure
it is worth pointing out that Strava says I ran an 18:46 5 km en route to this
result. If that is true and for the manageable effort I put into it, then I am
quite happy indeed with my current progress.

After the race I went and ran some more in order to reach my 20 km distance
goal for the day.

## Future

My [fall goal][fall] has settled on a half marathon on 4 November. Not much has
changed since the description in that blog post. As for races I decided against
a race during conference week in Madrid at the end of Phase Two's third high
week. Instead I will be racing a 10 km race on Sunday 7 October, that is, at
the end of the recovery week, and I will drop the VO2max workout from the week
that follows it to compensate. This will be a decent test in terms of running
on somewhat rested legs, but the terrain is hilly and, at times, muddy, so that
will not help a good time. Most of all I would like to destroy my time from
last year, when I raced it despite being rather sick still.

[parkrun]: https://www.parkrun.com/
[becktonparkrun]: {{site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-01-16-beckton-parkrun %}
[brickfieldsparkrun]: http://www.parkrun.ie/brickfields/
[results]: http://www.parkrun.ie/brickfields/results/weeklyresults/?runSeqNumber=33
[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1811181902
[fall]: {{site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-08-08-fall-2018 %}
