---
layout: post
title: "Antwerp 10 Miles"
date: 2019-04-28 18:00:00
tags:
- report
- road
---

Looking for something different in my spring planning, I checked out some of
the bigger flat options in the area.  For the first time, I gave the 10 mile
(16.093 km) in Antwerp a serious look. It is an odd distance in most of the
world.  Checking [Tinman's running calculator][tinman] with some of my race
times placed me around the low 6Xs for most of my PRs.  My [parkrun in
November][parkrunvictoria] however gave me a time of 59 high. Straw, prepare to
be grasped at. I had a race and a crazy one hour goal to aim for.

## Training

I detailed most of my training in my [last race report][lier] on the
Natuurloopcriterium Lier. As mentioned there, I was trying out six day cycles
while preparing for that 10 km race.  From the Lier race to this one, there
were 29 days (this one included). I used the first five days as a recovery
cycle. That left four six day cycles to work with. The plan was to have 2.5 to
3 regular cycles, followed by tapering the last 1.5 to 1 cycle. In the regular
cycles, the workouts would be **T**hresholds and **L**ong runs.  Tapering would
be about dropping some volume and having a race pace workout the Tuesday before
the race.

The plan fell apart.

The days after the Lier race, my right knee was feeling a bit iffy during runs.
Not to the point that I felt worried, I just noticed it weirdly from time to
time. I continued my plan as is. On day eight, I had my first real workout: 6k
@ T. It was a hot day, but it went alright. I did notice the right knee some on
a climb after the T work. Two days later the knee issues seemed gone, but
instead I started having a tight right calf on that day's run.  The L on day 11
is probably where things went wrong. I ran 22 km and my calf was tight from the
start. In retrospect, I should have probably called it quits earlier.  In a
combination of bad news, I caught some illness for a day or two.

After the sickness, the calf still felt tight and I dropped a T run altogether.
The days following, my calf swung back and forth some between being rather
tight and barely noticeable. To remedy things, I kept my runs in the GA range,
maxing out at an hour. I resolved to not try anything special until I had two
days of completely not noticing the calf. Eventually that moment came... with
about a week to go till the Antwerp 10 miles. I had lost slightly over a week
of intensity in what already was a reasonably tight schedule. With all my GA
runs, my volume had not suffered too much though. It bummed me out slightly,
but I figured there was nothing I could do to fix it any more. Play the hand
you are dealt.

It was too late to do anything intensive, so I just continued largely as
originally planned: taper time. I did my race pace workout on Tuesday and [it
did not inspire confidence][tuesdayracepace]. The pace felt too hot.
Regardless, no other goal interested me, so I was not to be swayed.

Quick take: I still think my original motivation (more rest than three workouts
per week, more intense than two workouts per week) for trying out six day
cycles is sound. However, even with my somewhat lenient schedule, I found it a
real pain to plan around at times ("wait when do I have a long run this
week?"). I will likely switch back to seven day cycles just for the easier
planning.

Side note: I restarted bike commuting in this training period, but I do not
think that affected me much. I do them really easy usually.

## Goals and Strategy

I had my stretch goal that, after the race pace workout, really felt like a
stretch goal: 1 hour. Nothing else really interested me here. I am not very
good at setting B or C goals. I was glad to find out the race would have a
pacer for the 1 hour people. Just hang on to him with everything I have in my
body and I should be good.

For reference, the pace to aim for is 3:43.6 per km.

## Course Details

The first 2 km are pretty much flat. After that you turn onto a highway, which
means climbing up its ramp. After that first climb you get a brief respite as
you descend into the Kennedytunnel under the Schelde river.  Of course, that
also means climbing back out of it. After emerging on the other side of the
river, you take the ramp off the highway. This one sends you through another
quick tunnel.  After climbing back out, you get a nice π turn to really slow
you down. This all covers the first 7ish km of the race.

Next up you run towards the older parts of the city. The streets get a bit more
narrow, there are some more turns, but it is all flat. Main downside: a decent
amount of cobble sections. I lost track of how much exactly. Cobbles suck
though.

After 13 km, you have left the old city behind you, make another π turn and
almost immediately head into the Waaslandtunnel back to the other side of the
Schelde river. A long tunnel, 2.1 km with about 1.8 km of covered area. Half of
it is heading down to 37 metre below sea level, the other half is climbing back
out.  About 4% each way. When you leave the tunnel, you are 15.1 km into the
race, one km to go.  One final π turn puts you on the final 500 some metre.

## Pre Race Agony

My sleep was largely OK in the final days leading up to the race. On the day
itself I slept in as much as possible: the race start was not till 14h30. The
weather also promised good times: 12ish C, likely drizzly. I had about 100g of
muesli and some leftover spaghetti bolognese from the night before. Besides
that, the usual drinking of copious amounts of water till about an hour before
the start.  We made our way over through public transport. This went alright
until we hit Antwerp itself: all the trams were stuffed with runners and very
delayed. Not very pleasant, but we got there in the end.

Once arrived, with little over an hour to go till the start, I picked up my bib
at the expo. There was almost no line. I wanted to also grab a pacing bracelet
that the site mentioned they were offering. However, the lady told me they had
none for a one hour goal. She tried to help my by offering their lowest one:
the 1h10 bracelet. I politely declined.  I tried to use the toilet (_long_
lines that took a while) and changed into my running clothes. I went for a jog
to warm up, forced another pee, and passed by the girlfriend for the final
time. She was nice enough to have come along on the trip to carry my stuff and
maybe snap some pictures. With maybe 15-20 minutes to go, it started lightly raining
some. I took out a rain poncho, had some final swigs of water, and made my way
to the start.

As I got nearer, it turned out you had to go allll the way around to reach the
_end_ of the wave, the only place through which you could enter. Fuck, getting
shorter on time here. I jogged behind some others, weaving through people who
seemed less in a hurry. After a few 100 metre I reached the entrance to the
wave.  Now to get all the way to the bloody front again. I should have probably
tried to jump a fence somewhere instead, but it was too late for that.  I
slowly made my way closer to the front of the wave, looking for my 1h pacer.
Not an easy task in a race with ~22500 finishers and only three waves. Most
people let me pass, some people refused to make way. Eventually, with about 5
minutes to go, I got stuck 5-10 rows down from the front of the wave. Ish.
Turns out there was another box ahead of us for people with a bib under 1550
(mine was not). The 1h pacer? He was in that zone, obviously.  When signing up
I had filled in 1:02 as expected time, thinking that should be an "easy" task
even on a slightly worse day. Apparently that was not enough for the organisers
to put me in that special first 1550 people box. For reference, 1h02 would have
put you in 264th spot on the final results. Fuckers. I lost my cool and my mind
was racing to find an alternative to "run hard at the start to catch up to
the pacer".

## Race

Nothing came to mind. As I crossed the start line, the one hour pacer did not
seem too far away. The "run harder" plan was on. I ran on the edge of the road
and passed plenty of people that first two km. The rain had stopped minutes
before starting, but there were puddles still. Some people made crazy cat jumps
to avoid hitting one, but I just stormed through the puddles. They were not
very deep anyway.

Going on to the highway ramp slowed me down some, I always seem to have trouble
with climbs compared to others. After the climb, I followed two guys as we kept
up a high pace heading down into the Kennedytunnel.  Climbing back out of the
tunnel did not go as smoothly and I had to let them go.

{% include racesplit.html content='
GPS splits: 3:33, 3:41, 3:53. Fourth km I was on sub 3:37 pace when I hit the
tunnel and lost GPS. Also no fifth km because of that.
' %}

I passed their 5 km sign somewhere in the low 18 minutes (the first sign I
noticed, supposedly there were signs every km). I should have started manually
lapping when I passed it, but at the time I did not realise how badly the
tunnel had affected the GPS already. Pity. For a one hour 10 miler, I needed an
18:38 5 km so I was ahead of schedule (as expected with my "catch up to the
pacer" plan). However, I was starting to feel it. Worse, the one hour pacer
still seemed equally far off. I was starting to realise this would not work.

Things stayed flat for a few minutes after the 5 km sign. Then we dipped back
into a short tunnel, climbed back out, and made a full turn.  Welp, I was
blowing up a little with still 9 km to go. I knew I needed to try to just hang
on to someone for a bit to regain my senses and my cool. If I did not, I would
start slowing down slightly. My mental game always has some trouble with these
moments. There was no plan or assessment as to who to follow and I soon found
myself behind a ginger guy in a red shirt who seemed to be doing alright. The
next kilometres are a bit of a haze as I followed him as much as I could. I
honestly do not really remember much from this part, even when trying to right
after the race.  I was dying a little and my brain must have gone into some
partial shut down just to keep the legs moving.

{% include racesplit.html content='
Official halfway split: 29:47 and in 183rd position. Assuming an 18:10 as an
estimate for the first 5 km sign, the previous 3 km were at 3:49 pace.
' %}

I do remember swearing at every cobble section we hit and there were quite a
few. Luckily, the longest stretch of cobbles had a tiny edge (maybe 50 cm?) of
cement on the side. I am guessing it was placed there for bikers. We happily
used it and everyone ran in single file along that section. It crossed my mind
that those running in the bigger crowds would not be as fortunate.

There was another section where we ran on some green outdoor mat thing. I
thought "how silly to place that here". When the mat ended however, the tiled
floor turned out rather slippery from the earlier rain still. Maybe the mat was
not the worst idea.

The girlfriend was waiting for me somewhere along the 9-10 km mark, but I did
not notice. I was not expecting her this side of the river. She managed to snap
some pictures though.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20190428-antwerp10miles.9kmark.jpg' description='Following ginger around the 9-10 km mark. White pants hung with us for quite a while, but I did not register exactly how long.' %}

Eventually we left the old city. However, my mind remains a haze as to anything
particular that might have happened.  I did not snap out of it till right
around we started descending into the final and longest tunnel, the
Waaslandtunnel. Somebody passed me and ginger red shirt and I realised I should
start speeding up too. This was a downhill (checking it later puts it around 4%
for 1 km), which means I would probably want to bank some time for my eventual
slower uphill. I latched onto the guy (largely dark clothes and with headphones
in) and we raced into the tunnel.

{% include racesplit.html content='Official split at 13.3 km, the tunnel entrance: 50:08 and 200th position.
Since the halfway split we had been running 3:52s average, a far cry from my
goal pace. Cumulative pace was now at 3:46, or around a 60:47 10 miler.
(Ignoring rounding errors)' %}

Going downhill was nice and it lasted quite a while. We passed quite some
people and everything started feeling alright again. Passing the 14 km marker
even made me think I could still be on track for my sub 1h goal without much
effort. As evidenced by the above race split calculation, that is likely
incorrect, though depending on how hard we were storming downhill, maybe it was
not too far off.  I will admit I do not trust my mind much after everything
written above _and_ I remember staring at my time and giving up with a
guesstimate rather than trying any actual calculations. After the downhill came
the uphill (also about 4% over 1 km) and I quickly had to let headphones guy
go. More people started passing me, some I tried to briefly latch on to. You
would think I would be better at climbing with all the climbing I do in
Brussels. We got out of the covered part of the tunnel (still needing to climb
a few 100 metre further) and I noticed how much nicer a slight breeze was in
terms of perceived warmth.

{% include racesplit.html content='
Official split at 15.1 km, the tunnel exit: 57:04 and 197th position. This
would make my pace in the tunnel 3:51 average. I expected it to be faster,
but they do say you cannot make up uphill pace in the downhill. Projected
finish time: 60:49.
' %}

At this point I still thought I could make my goal so I gathered everything I
had left and kept the pace high. There was no indication of how far you still
had to go besides a "100m to go" banner in the distance. I figured I might come
there with x seconds to spare, figure this would boost me for a crazy final 100
metre sprint. Instead, when I glanced at my watch I saw the dreaded 1:00:00 had
already passed by. Goodbye my goal. I saw a photographer at the line and
managed a moose sign as I crossed the line.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20190428-antwerp10miles.finish.jpg' description='Moosing across the line. I do not know what is up with my mouth either. Cap was turned back since there was no rain and I got some extra wind on my forehead this way.' %}

## Results

The [final verdict][mypageresults] is 60:28 and 195th position. So close, yet
so far. You can also have a look at my [Strava activity][strava] as well as the
[full official results][results]. Here an overview of the official splits (and
my 5k estimate) with paces.

|---+---+---+---+---|
|Distance|Time|Cumul pace|Block's pace|Projected|
|--:|--:|--:|--:|--:|
|5000|18:10|3:38|3:38|58:28|
|8047|29:47|3:42|3:49|59:34|
|13300|50:08|3:46|3:52|60:40|
|15100|57:04|3:47|3:51|60:49|
|16093|60:28|3:45|3:25|60:28|

<!-- Wim Herman, bib 2209, https://www.strava.com/activities/2329587342 -->

I found the pacer in the results afterwards. He crossed the start line 43
seconds before I did. However, looking at the Strava FlyBy information, I never
actually got closer to him during my attempt to catch up to him. I reckon that
means he also started a bit harder than one hour pace. It does explain why it
feels like I could not get closer despite definitely going harder than goal
pace for several kilometres. Makes me wonder if I could have bridged the gap
otherwise, with the mental boost of seeing them get closer.

<!-- Benjamin van de Velde, bib 1157 -->

I put 11 seconds on my impromptu pacer (ginger red shirt) in that final three
kilometre. However, he had also started before me, so his time is a little bit
slower still: 61:03.

As usual a far cry from the winner, who did it in 48:42. The female winner
managed 57:58.

## Future

In the near future I have first got the VUB's 12 urenloop planned (relays of
550 metre each for 12 hours), but that will likely just be a fucked up long
run.  After that follows the 20 km door Brussel, though I do not see that as a
real goal. I will likely just train through it or have a minimal taper. I just
figure that I should be able to easily PR if the weather is not horrendous.

I will move back to a seven day cycle, just because it makes the planning
easier. The workouts I will fill it with will be 1500m-3000m racing oriented
until I find an actual fall goal to aim for.

[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/2325665089
[results]: http://www.chronorace.be/Classements/classement.aspx?eventId=1187184795226934&IdClassement=19130&mode=large
[mypageresults]: http://prod.chronorace.be/mypage/mypage.aspx?eventId=1187184795226934&bibnumber=3637
[tinman]: http://www.runfastcoach.com/calc2/index.php
[tuesdayracepace]: https://www.strava.com/activities/2313478127
[parkrunvictoria]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-11-21-victoria-dock-parkrun %}
[lier]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2019-03-30-natuurloopcriterium-lier %}
