---
layout: post
title: "Broken Ankle Chronicles: Phase 4"
date: 2020-11-13 18:00:00
tags:
- injury
- broken ankle
- rehab
---

On Sunday 6 September 2020 I broke my left ankle. I tried to somewhat keep
track of the recovery process to maybe help someone in a similar predicament
frame the injury and know what to expect. I will describe significant events as
days since the accident. Day 0 is 6 September, day 1 is 7 September, and so on.

This post describes days 40 (Friday 16 October) through 68 (Friday 13 November).

<!-- TODO: Link to previous -->

## Day 40: And On That Bombshell

In hopefully the last trip to the orthopaedist, I wait in the non-handicapped
people line at the hospital. I can walk with small steps and do not have
trouble standing upright, so I figure this is good enough for me now. A lady
waiting in line behind me disagrees when she sees the special sandal on my foot
and the two crutches I bring along for safety. She flags down a nurse and
together they gently force me into the handicapped line. Fine!

A fresh x-ray later, I sit with the orthopaedist. He tells me the two parts of
the bone have not fused together. Oh. Before I get too disappointed, he says my
ankle is fine though. Sometimes this just happens, *the two parts may never
fuse together*. (What???) It should not affect me in any way. To be sure he
does some poking and bending of my ankle. Everything feels fine, except for the
expected lack of flexibility of course. To resolve that he prescribes me some
kine (physical therapy) appointments. Twice a week, up to 18 sessions total. He
says I might not need them all, but that is the maximum that easily gets paid
back by the healthcare system. Whatever it takes to get running right again, my
man, whatever it takes.

I also can use normal shoes again.

Later that day I set an appointment with the kine for early next week.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/17.20201018.the-legs.jpg' description='Looking better, though not quite right.' %}

## Day 41-46: A COVID19 Scare

The girlfriend did not feel too well and two of her friends had tested positive
for COVID19. It had been nearly two weeks since she had seen them, but we
played it safe. She got tested and I let the kine know that we would not be
able to meet till the girlfriend tested negative. Bit of a bummer, but it is
what it is.

I tried to use our elliptical too, but that does not feel right yet. Alas, no
actual sporting yet. We have a very old stationary bike, but it makes a lot of
noise on every spin so I cannot use it. My bike with gears is at a friend of
the girlfriend's, so I cannot use it either. I do have a single speed bike
available, but that means I need to be able to put quite some force on the
pedals, especially with all the hills around. I decide against that. Will have
to satisfy myself with walking and stretching for now. I get used to performing
a little daily walk with one crutch. The walk is about 3 km and near the end of
this period I even manage a large part of it without crutches at all. At home I
largely manage without crutches.

The area below the fracture ended up being pretty sore a lot of these days. I
believe the crappy-form walking was to blame. At the time I just was happy to
be outside though.

## Day 47: First Kine Visit

The kine gives me a stern look when I tell him about my walking. He tells me I
am not flexible enough for that yet and bans it for now. If I need to go
somewhere, I have to use one crutch. He does tell me at home I should avoid
using the crutches. Still need to put _some_ weight on it for it to get better.

The session (and every subsequent session) starts with him pushing my foot in
different directions (thus stretching the ankle). I am given exercises to do
while he judges my form and does the counting of reps. Final exercise he gives
me a ball to hold. He tells me to balance on the bad leg while throwing up the
ball and catching it again. He says the record in his practice is 80 throws as
he leaves me to my own devices for 5-10 minutes. To my own surprise I easily
beat the record, making it to 95 and to 87 on different tries. When I tell the
kine when he returns, he gives me a "hah" look and says "I never said the
record was done on solid ground, like where you are standing". He brings out a
foamy block pillow on which balancing turned out to be a loooot harder for me.
Oops. The session finishes by me spending some time on the stationary bike to
build cardio up. He tells me I should try biking for now.  He also gives me
some ankle stretches to do religiously at home: at least three times a day,
more often is better.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/18.20201023.kine.jpg' description='Part of the torture room.' %}

## Day 52: Second Kine Visit

The kine makes me do some exercises that really show me how weak my calf is
right now. Two main examples come to mind.

1. Sit on a chair. Use only the bad leg to get up. The higher the chair, the
   easier this will be. Turns out to be pretty much impossible for me.  He
   gives me a way to cheat the exercise since I have to start somewhere: put
   the heel of the good foot on the floor, putting the leg straight. This way
   some weight is moved away from the bad leg and it helps with the balancing.
   I could do it this way, but the original failure is humbling.
2. Stand on only the bad leg. Lift the heel. I could juuust barely lift it off
   the floor, with a lot of struggling. Somehow suffered my way to ten reps.
   Calf is way too weak, tear.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/19.20201027.knee-to-wall.jpg' description='At least the flexibility is slowly making progress.' %}

## Day 54-57: A Biking Weekend

The girlfriend and I took the train to a more natury part of Belgium and set up
in a hotel there for the long weekend. We did some big bike rides since I am
encouraged to bike. I have to avoid standing up on the pedals, my bad leg
cannot handle that kind of force yet.

Come Monday I am sore on the front of my thighs and in my calves. Turns out
biking 160 km out of nowhere over two days may be a bit much for the body. Who
could have thought. Tuesday I am somewhat sore still, but I am not worried
about it.

I had carried a crutch along for this trip, but did not end up needing it. The
kine a few days later also added that at this point it is "just for show" and
that I should stop using it. Still have to avoid walks much longer than the
likes of a cornershop though, if I can help it.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/20.20201030.stepgoal.jpg' description='I am not sure what the step goal bottomed out at, but this one on 30 October was pretty low.' %}


## Day 57-67: Once an Ellipticaller

Monday I try out the elliptical to see how it feels. The verdict... pretty ok!
I end up doing 30 minutes in my excitement. I also gave the two exercises
mentioned above another try. Actually managed the chair lift once or twice as
well as a heel lift. Some progress!  Wednesday the kine greenlights me to keep
ellipticalling. Yes! Time to make a plan of sorts.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/21.20201102.knee-to-wall.jpg' description='This amazing flexibility (ha) is what enables me to use such advanced devices like the elliptical. Do not mind the wall, the cats have decided it is something to plant their claws in. Repeatedly.' %}

That Wednesday session also has me pass a mental block. He places a bosu ball
in front of me and tells me to jump onto it. The catch: I can only use my bad
leg for the landing. Supposedly I should be able to easily do it and my
reservations about it are just mental. I stare at it with a lot of doubt, but
eventually make the jump. Turns out it really was easy. Nice. Today the session
finishes not with biking, but with running in place on the bosu ball. Not quite
real running yet, but I appreciate it.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/22.20201106.duo-mocking.jpg' description='I found my French was deteriorating, so was doing some Duolingo. No place to escape from my predicament though, Duo has no chill.' %}

Friday's session has more balancing, jumping, and running on the bosu ball. I
ask him whether it would be worth it to get one myself, but he tells me the
price is a bit steep for me likely abandoning it in the future. I check online
afterwards: 215 euro for the real deal. Not cheap indeed.

Saturday I tried the heel raises again and they went... largely OK! Some clear
progress. I was told my flexibility was still lagging behind on what he had in
mind though, that is less fun. The stretching continues.

## Day 68: Orthopaedist

Perhaps a bit worried that something else would still pop up, I make another
trip to the orthopaedist. My ankle area still swells easily and the slow
progress of my flexibility also does not help my confidence. Another quick
x-ray of the foot later, I find myself in front of the doctor. He has a look,
asks some questions, tells me not to worry about the swelling and flexibility,
and promptly discharges me. No more visits needed!

Later that day I think about the kine telling me that using the leg will help
me get better. I decide to improvise a standing desk to force some more usage
of the leg.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/23.20201113.standing-desk.jpg' description='Only the finest cardboard boxes for this work of art.' %}
