---
layout: post
title: "5000m TT (of sorts)"
date: 2020-07-03 20:00:00
tags:
- report
- time-trial
- track
- length:5000
---

After the [lactate test][lactate-test] a few weeks ago, I decided I wanted to
run a 5000m soon™ to compare the lactate test results to an all out effort.
There are still no races here in Belgium till 1 August, so I set my mind on
time trialling a 5000m on the track of the athletics club I am in. For planning
purposes, I mentioned it to the head coach there, who immediately offered to
pace me. He is quite a bit faster so that is nice. Logistically I figured I
would just aim for the later parts of a regular clubtraining, hoping it would
not be too busy any more.

## Training

After the [lactate test][lactate-test], I did two up weeks at 110 km. In the
first week I did a CV and a VO2max workout, besides the long run.  In the
second week I did another VO2max workout. Due to planning constraints I could
not do a second workout, though I still had my long run. In the week of the
time trial, I ended up having to take a day off on Monday due to some medical
checks. Notable only because I had been on a 129 day streak. It was more
accidental (easier to plan when I use all the days), so I did not care too
much.

The days preceding the time trial, my legs were acting up a bit, some niggles
appearing. On Friday, the day of the TT, everything felt fine though.

### Strength

I have been slacking since the lactate test and have not done any strength
training. I did, however, read "Running Anatomy" by Joe Puleo a nice book with
strength exercises in which they also detail (and draw) the exact muscles as
well as say how it helps your running. I will try to get back on the strength
wagon and use some structure from that book.

## Goal and Strategy

My spring goal was going under 17 minutes in the 5000 metre. That fell apart
because of COVID19, but the goal itself remained. For this time trial, I
figured I would give myself a little bit of leeway and aim for 16:50. That
makes for 3:22 per km, a rather useless thing to know as the track of my club
is a helpful 360 metre long. I prepared by having a list of splits for various
markings that appear on the track and planning to press the lap button every
two laps. I figured if I pay attention at the start and get into a rhythm, I
could get through a lot of it safely. Strategy wise, if that is even a thing in
a run like this, even splits seemed like the way to go.

## Race

After a warm-up in the nearby park, it became clear that there was going to be
some peer pressure on me to perform. The head coach (Maarten) who had offered
to do some pacing had recruited another much-faster-than-me guy, Hamza, the
other head coach, to also help. They then recruited two other guys from the
club to handle lap and split calling. They also shouted around the track to
keep lane 1 free, putting more eyes on us. If I was going to fail now, everyone
would see it.

It was in the low 20s C, the sun had come back out. There was also a decent
headwind (20km/h) on the far straight that did not seem to be present on the
home straight. We figured the pacers would catch some of that wind at least.

We started out with Hamza leading the way. It felt easy enough, but that's
expected so early into it. I immediately messed up my own lap / split taking
and quickly gave up on it altogether. Good thing we had someone calling out the
lap time as we passed. The goal per lap was 1:12.7, so calling it out I would
hear him count 9, 10, 11, 12. Trust the others. It took me a few laps to really
realise what they were doing though (or maybe they did not start out with doing
that) and those first several laps, I felt like we were not going quite fast
enough.

Maarten took over the leading at some point before halfway (I had already
largely stopped keeping track by that point) and we went noticeably faster from
there on. I started feeling slightly worse and worse, but pushed myself to keep
on Maarten's tail. The last 1000 metre I felt myself slowly falling apart, but
I kept finding another little bit of will to push myself. The times I heard
from the side were working out alright at least. Hamza rejoined the pacing
during or before that final 1000m and it felt a little bit like Kipchoge
running under 2hrs, except way slower. My form was really falling apart near
the end, but I managed a scrappy sprint of sorts to the line in the final 100m
still. This was hard.

## Results

Great success!

|distance|lap time|cumul|16:50|projected|
|--------:|------:|----:|-----:|------:|
|320|1:05.8|1:05.8|+1.1|17:07.9|
|680|†  1:14.0|2:19.8|+2.4|17:07.9|
|1040|1:15.7|3:35.5|+5.4|17:15.8|
|1400|†  1:15.7|4:51.1|+8.3|17:19.6|
|1760|1:12.3|6:03.4|+7.9|17:12.4|
|2120|†  1:12.3|7:15.7|+7.5|17:07.6|
|2480|1:10.4|8:26.1|+5.1|17:00.3|
|2840|†  1:10.4|9:36.4|+2.7|16:54.8|
|3200|1:12.7|10:49.1|+2.7|16:54.3|
|3560|1:12.7|12:01.9|+2.7|16:53.9|
|3920|†  1:12.7|13:14.6|+2.8|16:53.5|
|4280|1:10.7|14:25.3|+0.7|16:50.9|
|4640|1:10.7|15:36.0|-1.3|16:48.6|
|5000|†  1:10.7|16:46.7|-3.3||

† These are moments I actually remembered to press the lap button, all lap
times here are estimated with linear interpolation from those lap button times.

So it seems I was right in thinking that we started out a bit slow. Good thing
Maarten switched it up and made us speed up though. Some serious negative
splitting going on. Those last few laps were hell, but it looks like we managed
to cut off some more time in the process. New PR and for once I am completely
sure of the distance.

Looks like I also broke my [3000m PR][bsk-indoor] in the process. Taking just
the average pace of this entire run, puts my 3000m now at 10:04, a five second
improvement. Of course, with the negative splitting I am rather sure that the
last 3000m of this 5000m would have been faster than 10:04, but I am hesitant
to make a PR out of a bunch of interpolating. I will just have to run another
3000m and ensure I dip under 10 minutes.

## Future

The track calendar of what remains of the season should be finalising soonish.
Once that is done, I will be picking out some races to have some fun. It would
be nice to be able to set an official 5000m race time too, though I doubt I
will be able to replicate this effort without some pacing there too. As
mentioned above, I will probably look for a 3000m too, to go under 10 minutes.
Beyond those two, the world is my oyster. With this weird track season I will
have fun racing just about anything at this point.


[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/3708635995
[lactate-test]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-06-13-lactate-test %} "Lactate Test (13 June 2020)"
[bsk-indoor]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-02-23-bsk-indoor %} "Belgian Indoor 3000m Championship for students (22 Feb 2020)"
