---
layout: post
title: "Hangover Classic 5 km"
date: 2020-01-01 16:00:00
tags:
- report
- podium
- victory
---

The girlfriend's sister asked me on Sunday what my next race was. I realised I
did not have any concrete plans for the near future and took a look around. I
saw the Sly Fox Track Club (associated with the Sly Fox Brewing Company) was
holding their 5 km "Hangover Classic" on Wednesday 1 January. I was not
entirely sure yet how I would feel after New Year's Eve so held off on signing
up for a few more days, but eventually went through the motions the night
before. New Year's Day race, here I come.

## Training

After a rather disastrous November, due to illness, I had managed to get back
in the saddle in December. Two 100 km weeks were followed by an 80 km down week
in which I flew across the Atlantic Ocean to spend the holidays at the
girlfriend's family. Despite some jet lag after that, I got another 100 km week
in. The week of the race also will end up being a 100 km week. I figured I
would just be training through this 5 km race. Workouts were a long run every
week and something else mid week in the non-recovery weeks. That something else
was first an easy Threshold workout to get back into the swing of things after
the illness. The second 100 km had an [8Ã—400 metre Repetition
workout][strava-8x400] that went quite alright. The week before the race was a
[more proper Threshold workout][strava-threshold], though I think I took it too
easy in that one. In race week, the race replaced the midweek workout.

In the days leading up to the race, I did my long run (Sunday), a recovery run
(Monday), general aerobic (Tuesday), ice skating and lots of walking around
(Tuesday, for NYE). Sprinkle some beers throughout it all. I would not stay
true to the name of the race though, I did not drink nearly enough to be
hungover.

## Goal and Strategy

A goal of mine in 2020 is to break 17 minutes in the 5 km. I was not entirely
sure on what the course would be for this race, but it did not look ready for a
PR: quite some ups and downs and the weather report predicted 20 km / h winds.
The morning of the race, I woke up with a sore upper back and shot calves.
Definitely not going to work magic here.

I decided to somewhat play it by ear. If I thought I could control the other
guys there, I would play it safe and go for a podium/win. If somebody
immediately sped off, I would go hard or go home and start running sub 17 pace
for as long as I could.

## Race

Everything felt shot in the warmup and my legs felt too heavy when I tried some
strides. General shit feeling. Whoop. I still lined up at the front of the very
wide start line and was encouraged by not many people wanting to line up there.

From the start I immediately went to the front. As I zoomed down the hill for
200 metre, I heard some people latching on behind me. After that, I climbed for
about 400 metre during which I saw a bright yellow shirt come alongside me. As
we went downhill again towards the 1 km mark, I took the lead and kept my pace.

Upon reaching the end of the first kilometre, I turned right straight into a
strong headwind and an uphill. I purposefully slowed down a bit and saw a guy
in grey-black come up next to me. I forced the lead on him and ran behind him,
but he did not appreciate that much it seemed. He went a bit to the side and
forced me back into the wind. I came back abreast with him. At around 1.3 km it
stays flat-ish and we kept abreast. I had stopped hearing footsteps behind us
after that climb into the wind.

Up till km 2 we stayed like this and my effort felt rather controlled. The
breathing of my companion, however, had gotten a bit more laboured. Around the
2 km mark, there was some downhill and I decided to see what would happen if I
pushed a little more. I opened my stride and quickly dropped him. That went
smoother than expected.

Soon after the course looped around a block or two and then sends us back along
the way we came for a while. I kept the effort honest, but was not pressured to
push too hard. Had enough breath and all to return all the "goob jobs" and
similar encouragements from the people running in the other direction. With a
kilometre to go I passed a cop who called out to his partner "Oh that guy is
already back! He's going fast!". Works as a nice encouragement. A little later
I remembered to glance behind me to see if I was in the clear. With about 800
metre to go I had an alright gap, though there was a blue shirt I had not seen
earlier. I figured I could start pushing a little more just to be sure.

I did as much and I never started hearing anyone behind me. With about 500
metre to go, I passed the girlfriend and felt like I had the time to act silly
for her picture taking. Soon after I crested the hill and rushed downwards to
the finish line.

## Results

I finished in 17:47 ([strava], [results]), first overall of 240. That is my
first real victory (it's hard to count a parkrun as a victory). I got a nice
trophy, but alas no prize. Blue shirt finished 11 seconds behind. Grey-black
that I dropped around the 2 km mark was third in 18:04. I did not really feel
tired and went for my cooldown jog almost immediately.

## Future

My eyes are on the spring track season, but I will have to wait for the Belgian
calendar to be posted before I can do any planning there. I aim to go under 17
minutes on the 5000 metre. Probably should try a similar achievement on the
10,000 metre if I find any good ones. Besides those I will have to see what the
calendar brings in my very first track season.

[strava-8x400]: https://www.strava.com/activities/2926754599
[strava-threshold]: https://www.strava.com/activities/2955773020
[results]: https://runsignup.com/Race/Results/82010/
[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/2973570381
