---
layout: post
title: "Grote Prijs Electro 80"
date: 2020-01-26 18:00:00
tags:
- report
- cross country
---

This winter is my first cross country season. I ran a race at the end of
November after being sick for two weeks. That race had gone about as you might
expect, I suffered and finished in the slower quart of the 60 odd people that
took part. Since then I had not gotten around to running a second cross country
race. I figured I really should give it another shot before the season ended
and belatedly decided on the Grote Prijs Electro 80, held not too far away from
me. Due to my late decision, I opted for their short course option (2765m)
rather than the regular one (around 10k). I figured that would be easier to
plan in.

## Training

Two weeks out from the race, my week had been a bit stunted. There were a few
long flights and I dropped some runs. I had planned it as a down week already
anyway, so did not mind too much. I figured I would rather be safe than sorry.
In the end I ran just shy of 60 km that week spread over four runs.

The week before the race I was quite jetlagged and took it easy in the first
part. On Friday I felt alright enough again and did a [**T**hreshold
workout][workoutthreshold] totalling 33 minutes at pace. Two days later I
managed my long run alright too.  100 km total for the week.

The week of the race I wanted to still reach around 100 km. I also did not
really decide to take part in the race till about three days out. Thursday I
did a [8Ã—400m **R**epetitions workout][workoutrep]. The race was Sunday and I
decided to just cut up my normal long run into "warmup" and "cooldown" parts
surrounding the race. Those legs would also work as a means to get to the race
location which is about 7-8 km away. The girlfriend was nice enough to bike
along to carry my stuff. 98.5 km for the week.

## Goal and Strategy

A lot more fast people show up in the club scene, so there is not even a hint
of podium ambitions in these races for me. I just wanted to ensure I did not
get caught up in the crazy sprint at the start of your average cross country
race and then just run my own race from there.

## Race

The line-up was not too big, only 32 people toed the line. I placed myself a
little on the outside. The start goes uphill and I still caught myself going a
bit fast the first 10s of meters. I noticed early enough though and reeled
myself in. I quickly found myself behind mostly everyone. About 200m in, I was
30th of 32, not that I realised it at the time.

As we neared the top of that starting uphill, I had found an effort level that
seemed alright. In a cross country race and with undulating terrain, pace will
only tell you so much, so I ignored it throughout the race. I quickly noticed
not everyone had taken a calm start. I slowly began overtaking some heavier
breathers. This did not always go easily, the path is pretty narrow in a lot of
places. I made do and used the moments of being stuck as a quick breather.

About halfway through I found myself behind a group of four and a very narrow
turning path. No hope of easily passing. This lasted close to 100m and I was
getting too annoyed with being stuck. At some point there is a narrow sideways
edge of rock next to the already narrow path we were running on. I took the
opportunity, but fucked up some and twisted my right ankle before passing a
single guy. I briefly swore and went for the gap anyway. In a few steps I was
past the four and racing away. The adrenaline was helping me along. Another
100m further the path widened enough to easily pass. Of course.

I was alone for a bit, but eventually caught up to another person about 500m
from the finish. I hung behind him for 200m as we went downhill, he was going
too fast to try to overtake on this path and I got a slight breather. After
that we turned and went uphill again. He sped up and I had no answer to his
acceleration. He dropped me.

As I turned into the final 100m, I heard some noise behind me and figured
someone was approaching. I pushed out a final sprint and held the two people
off.

[Video of that final sprint on YouTube, slowed down eight times.][finishvid]

## Results

[Strava]. It took a while for the [results] to be available, but eventually I
found out I was 15th out of 32. Neat, made 10 euro (+ a 5 euro coupon) that
way. They pegged me at 9:29 over 2765 metre. That would be 3:26 pace. Went
quite a lot nicer than my first attempt at cross country. First place finished
in 8:12, third place in 8:30. Top 10 would have required a 9:09.

I felt the twisted ankle though. I managed to run home, but cut it shorter than
I would have liked. It acted up for another week after, so I had to be careful
not to turn it oddly. It did not affect my running at least.

## Future

This might be my final cross country race of this season. Rather than finding a
third one, I have my eyes set on a 3000m in an indoor meet. I will probably end
up having to run that as a time trial given the pace of the competition, but I
am eager to give it a try. I have never before raced indoor or a 3000m.

[Strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/3046139861
[results]: http://kvac.be/sites/temp/file.php?id=708
[finishvid]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6qzBaftTZa0
[workoutrep]: https://www.strava.com/activities/3036028560
[workoutthreshold]: https://www.strava.com/activities/3019558888
