---
layout: post
title: "I Broke My Ankle"
date: 2020-09-06 18:00:00
tags:
- injury
- broken ankle
---

On Sunday 6 September 2020 I broke my left ankle. I tried to somewhat keep
track of the recovery process to maybe help someone in a similar predicament
frame the injury and know what to expect. I was first going to dump one big
post, but decided to split it up instead to show more of a timeline. I will
describe significant events as days since the accident. Day 0 is 6 September,
day 1 is 7 September, and so on.

## Context

I was avoiding workouts because of a niggle around this time, so had been doing
new routes and passing by different places in order to slowly work on
completing all the streets in my (greater) area. Because everything nearby was
already long done, I had planned a short bike ride (5ish km) to a different
starting point, saving me the trouble of running there. I got running and just
shy of 5 km into my run, my planned route was blocked off due to construction.
My map showed a small grassy path between two fields that ran largely parallel and
rejoined further on, so I decided to go down that path instead.

## Critical Failure

The grass got longer and the path more narrow. I saw someone come from the
other direction and, being the good citizen that I am, realised I should think
how to keep my 1.5 metre distance from him in these COVID19 times. I veered
more to the side, but got into even worse long grass. The guy signalled he
would just stop and make way for me, so I went back out of the really long
grass to the just regularly long grass of the path. However, apparently in the
few metre I was off the path, there was now a ditch I had to cross. I did not
quite realise this. Because of the long grass I was half running half jumping.
A bad combo with that ditch.  I jumped, in essence, onto the slope without
realising or anticipating. I heard something that might have been a crack and
fell down in pain.

Now I twist my ankle pretty often, so I was not immediately worried. That came
a second or two later as I rolled to sit on my ass and actually saw the ankle.
So. Very. Swollen. I quickly realised what had happened and felt like such an
idiot. The other guy came to me. It turned out he only knew Spanish so he was
not much of a help. My little bit of Duolingo did not prepare me for this. Not
that I think many people could have done something useful in that moment.

I sat there for quite some time as the guy remained next to my side. I wanted
to feel alone in my stupidity and signalled I would be fine. I limped to the
end of the path and sat back down. I needed to think what to do, perhaps assess
what I thought it was. Running was definitely off the table. Taxi home? Taxi to
a hospital? Walk to my bike and bike home? Despite having run 5 km at this
point, I had looped back in a way. I was only 1 km from my bike. Biking home
was also largely downhill. Clearly I was right earlier to feel like an idiot,
because I decided to walk to my bike.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/01.20200906.right-after.jpg' description='Contemplating my options after limping to the end of the path.' %}

## Walk of Shame

Walking (limping) was painful, but I still managed in the end. Took 16 minutes
for 870m. Ye I tracked that, I was curious. I biked home, which actually went
quite easily and was essentially painless. Just avoided that foot when stopping
at a light. Eventually I got home and up the flight of stairs. I took off my
shoes to further inspect the damage. I briefly tried some icing. I looked up
how to recognise broken ankles. You cannot put any weight on them, so that was
good, I still could!

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/02.20200906.back-home.jpg' description='Assessing whether I need to go to the hospital.' %}
{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/03.20200906.hospital-wait.jpg' description='Yeah I think you know where this is going.' %}

Finally I came to my senses though, broken or not, this amount of pain and
swelling deserved a look by a doctor. Only partial senses though, I *walked* to
the hospital a few blocks away. (add another ~800m) After 20 minutes
(guesstimating) in the waiting room before the triage nurse got to me, the
adrenaline must have worn off. Walking was now way too painful. Good thing I
went to the ER after all. Had an X-ray taken. Verdict: broken ankle. Fuck I was
disappointed. Up till that point I was still holding out hope for "really bad
sprain" or something similar. Hearing it was broken was an immediate verdict of
being out for at least six weeks. They put a plaster cast on my leg and booked me for a
visit with an orthopaedist the next day. Surgery might be needed so they wanted
the specialists to have a better look.

I was given crutches and a prescription for painkillers as well as "Clexane":
injections you put every 24 hours in your belly to keep the blood flowing,
otherwise clots may form in the leg and lead to problems elsewhere. Also had to
lie down with my leg elevated. Fun fun. This first time with crutches was
difficult, I almost fell going down their ramp.  Heading home was quite hard
too. Worked up a sweat, but eventually got back. Dropped in the couch and
embraced feeling like shit for the rest of the day. Waiting for the girlfriend
to come home and help me with dinner.

Later in the evening and night, I notice a lot of pressure on the ball of my
foot because of the plaster.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/04.20200906.first-cast.jpg' description='The first cast, set on my leg by the ER folk.' %}

## Day 1: The Orthopaedist

Despite the hospital being so close-by, I taxi to/from it. Walking with
crutches is too much effort. Luckily I can go in the handicapped people line at
the reception. Pass by the ortho who quickly sends me out to radiology for a
new scan. Not sure why yesterday's pictures would be insufficient, but I assume
they know what they are doing. My ortho thinks I'm an edge case in terms of
needing surgery. To be certain, he confers with his colleagues. Eventually they
decide against surgery. Supposedly this will heal fine in 99% of the cases, so
the extra risk that comes with a surgery is not deemed worth it.

The nurse puts a new plaster cast on my leg. The previous one was apparently
closed which is not a good idea when the area around the fracture can still
swell up. The new one is "half open", meaning there is plaster on three sides
while the front side just has bandages. This way, any swelling should not cut
off blood flow or hurt as much.

Spoiler: it will still hurt.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/broken-ankle/05.20200907.second-cast.jpg' description='The second cast, placed a day later at the ortho.' %}

[benparkes]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCZPqG0yh_xPm2AyLjffbDvw
[lactate-test]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-07-03-5000m-tt %} "5000m TT (of sorts) (7 Jul 2020)"
