---
layout: post
title: "3000m @ Flanders Cup OEH"
date: 2021-08-14 10:00:00
tags:
- report
- track
- length:3000
---

We're back! My first race since an [indoor 3000m in February 2020][bskindoor].
Since then COVID19 ruined everyone's plans a little and I messed up my ankle a
little (see the multitude of posts about that one). Now that I finally feel
like I have some consistent volume again, if not necessarily consistent speed
work, I figured it was time to get back into racing. Any racing. This one was
relatively close to me, so I could bike there (in the end I got a ride anyway).
The distance was also acceptable. I think I prefer focussing on the 5000m and
10000m events, but 3000m will do.

The lucky race? A meet in the Flanders Cup, this one in Huizingen held by the
OEH. Apparently the meets in the Flanders Cup are all similar in their setup
(or so I've heard, this is my first one). A decent chunk of people sign up,
including plenty foreigners. All the fast people get put in the main heat for
their chosen distance. Everyone else gets put in other heats held at a later
point in the day. Case in point: the main heat for the 3000m was to be held at
19:25. My heat and others would not start till 22:10.

## Training

After the [bruised ribs mishap in May][bruisedrib], I quickly went back on the
volume I had built back right before the rib bruising. I also did not play much
with distance: regular weeks @ 100 km, down weeks @ 80 km. I wanted to get
fully used to this again. Adding intensity back took a little longer. I still
felt my ribs till early to mid June and then hurt my right heel a little
blasting down some rocky hill. All told I did not add any quality (unless you
count long runs and some sporadic strides) until early July.

On 8 July I did a Repetition workout, trying to get some speed back into my
legs. It was 8×200m and felt pretty smooth throughout. I tried to just go by
feel and clocked mostly 36s. The week after I had a planned down week, reduced
volume, no workout. The week after that down week, I did another Repetition
workout. This one was 5×400m and felt rough. Warmer (26C) and sunny day, I got
a bit of a sidestitch going during the warmup and the abs felt a bit rough
throughout. Splits averaged 74s.  Then I spent a week in Slovenia which
hampered my running a bit: quite some hiking, some too steep running, oh and I
twisted my left ankle. Whoops.  The Slovenia week ended up being a bit of a
wash: no workout and the final distance for the week was just shy of 70 km.
Then last week I was back at 100 km volume and did another Repetition workout.
Bumping it up some more from last time, I did 6×400m, again at ±74s. The
workout felt noticeably better than the previous one.

Finally in the week of the race I still wanted to keep a non-race workout
planned in as well as sticking to my 100 km weekly volume. I moved my workout
up from the usual Thursday to Tuesday and changed it to mostly Threshold stuff
with some 3k race pace at the end as a test (4×1.5k T; 600m @ 3k race pace). I
figured the Threshold was light enough, but would still emulate some fatigue
when doing the race pace part. Hopefully a good test for the race itself. For
the Threshold parts I aimed for 3:35 / km, which is Jack Daniels' suggestion
for my 5000m PB. Possibly a little fast, but I was fine with that. The "3k race
pace" here is 3:20 per km (80s per lap, 10:00 for 3000m). See the next section
for my reasoning for that. With the race on Saturday, I also expected to still
do a long run on Sunday. Was not looking forward to that one.

## Goal and Strategy

In my indoor 3000m in February 2020, I had aimed for 10:00 (well, just faster
than 10:00, evidently). I ran alone from the gun, even though I might have been
able to hold on to a group that ran slightly in front of me, stubbornly not
wanting to blow up. I still got into rough mental terrain, slowed down some,
and in the end only ran 10:09.

My [5000m TT][5ktt] from July 2020 suggested a 9:41-9:46, depending on which
calculator you want to believe. Evidently since that my training had been shit,
what with the broken ankle and all. I have no plans to gamble for that
estimate.

Instead I figured I once more should go for 10:00. If I am near that 5k TT
shape, it should be "easy" enough. Ideally there is some group I can run with.
I should probably allow some leeway here and try to follow a group even if they
go a bit faster than 10:00. I think I rather _not_ be on my own again, TTing.
At least then if I start blowing up, I can put all my focus on trying to follow
the guy in front of me. Hopefully.

So goal: sub 10, strategy: hang on to someone. If things fail, it does not
matter much to me, this is just to get back into racing.

## Pre-Race

I caught a ride to the venue, but we had to go pretty early: some other guys
were doing earlier distances and they also wanted to watch the much earlier
planned main heat of the 3000m. In the end there were three heats for the
3000m, about 20 people each. The two slower heats were to be the last two
events of the meet. Because of all this, we were at the venue a good three
hours before my race would start. No biggy as it gave me time to observe the
way fitter people and just watch some races. With about two hours to go till
the start I had some bread as "dinner". My race would not be till 22:10 and
with us coming over this early, I had skipped a normal dinner. I also had a
banana and some swigs of water. I figured that should do till the race.

I started getting ready for my warmup around 21:30 with some leg swings,
starting to jog at 21:35. Jogged about 5k, then switched to spikes. Copied what
I saw all around me from the other athletes and did not put socks on in the
spikes. Continued warming up on the track, jogging back and forth a little and
adding some short accelerations. A last quick pee and I was ready for the race
to start.

## Race

I was seeded last in my heat so started from the second row. Perfectly fine for
me, I was not expecting to be anywhere but near the back. Plus even if I had
wanted to be at the front, that seemed easy enough with a start like this.

The gun went and I immediately settled in at the back. After 200m I already
notice the pace is a bit hot for me, but I did not want to end up in the exact
same situation as my previous 3000m, so I ensured I kept hanging on. Hanging on
did not last _that_ much longer though. I think by the time about 600-800m was
run, I started letting go a bit. Somewhere around here we were already going 7s
faster than the 10:00 pace I was going for (as in, passing by at 1:53 instead
of 2:00 kind of thing) and I figured that would just lead to me blowing up. It
really sucked, but I was on my own.

I did not pay as much attention to the clock from there on as I had had in
mind. At some point I did do a quick check and noticed I was still going faster
than 20s/100m. Just keeping it up by feel and hope I don't die.

About halfway through I also started feeling a painful spot on my right
heel/achilles developing. Not putting on socks while wearing the spikes was
coming back to haunt me and a blister was developing from the friction of shoes
against certain spots. I'll need padding or socks next time because I ended up
with symmetrical blisters on each foot. One each on the achilles where the
shoes ends, one a bit more lateral on the back of the heel area. Not fun, but
luckily it did not hurt until showering later in the evening (and also still
the next day on my run).

Back in the race, with maybe three laps to go, I noticed that I was slowly
getting closer to some people up ahead. Hesitant to overdo things, I did not
change pace, but just hoped I could use them later on. I crept closer and with
two laps ago started slowly reeling them closer.

With one lap to go, I was still about 10 metre behind two guys, but I figured I
might as well start the kill-yoself final sprint, or whatever I still had left
resembling a final sprint. I quickly was right on their tail, at the top of the
first bend (350ish m to go?), briefly wondered if I should pass them now or
wait for the end of the curve, then went past them. By the end of the curve, it
sounded like one of them tried to hang on to me still, but that did not last
long. I moved up more and passed a third guy on the back straight. With about
200m to go, there were still two guys up ahead that I thought I might catch. I
think I briefly slowed down, realising I was emptying the tank, then said to
myself there was nothing to be saving myself for and tried to push the last
bits of energy out. I got a bit closer, but not close enough. I had the
presence of mind to not think about stopping my watch or anything till
definitely across the line, I think I even did a likely meaningless lean across
the line everything for the hundreds of a second.

## Results

[Official electronic timing results][results] put me at a nice 9:42.61. That sub 10 went
smoothly in the end!

I sometimes remembered to press my lap button. I also just did not want to
press it too often, especially during that opening where I was working to tag
along. Here are those splits.

|distance|lap time|lap pace /400m|cumul|10:00|projected|
|--------:|------:|---:|----:|-----:|------:|
|1200|3:46.4|75.5s|3:46.4|-13.6|9:26.0|
|2000|2:41.4|80.7s|6:27.8|-12.2|9:41.6|
|2600|2:01.1|80.7s|8:28.9|-11.1|9:47.2|
|3000|1:13.7|73.7s|9:42.6|-17.3|9:42.6|

This result caught me a little by surprise as it is pretty much equivalent to
my 5000m TT from before the breaking of my left ankle. You can imagine I was
pretty satisfied with it. Gives me hopes that I'll be able to PR or more in the
5000m this season too. I'll admit I was worried I would be way behind on
everything. Of course it also helped that I had others to race against, it
gives that little extra boost.

The winner of my heat was way ahead: 8:56.79. The two faster heats were won in
8:22.76 and 7:50.88. All waaaaay ahead of me. Of all those that started (and
finished) the 3000m, I was 46th out of 49. Not dead last! The three guys I
passed in the last lap were 3, 5, and 6 seconds behind me. The two guys I did
not manage to close the gap too were 2 and 4 seconds ahead.

## Future

I did not come in with any expectations or high hopes, but it does give me an
indication for the future. I have by now decided to do a 5000m next week, just
to keep the racing going. Then I'll be occupied for two weeks, but I hope to
still find another race or two in September and October to maybe run a nice
time. The goal for this season was to go sub 16:30 (decided on after I had
built my volume back from the ankle break), but I'll take a PR (sub 16:46) for
the time being. If I find the time to also plan in a 10,000m (my PR for this is
just an averaged split of my Antwerp 10 Miles race from two years ago, aka
super soft), that would also be nice.

[bskindoor]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-02-23-bsk-indoor %} "Belgian Indoor 3000m Championship for students (22 Feb 2020)"
[bruisedrib]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2021-05-20-i-need-bubble-wrap-armour %} "I Need Bubble Wrap Armour (20 May 2021) - relating how I bruised my rib and the aftermath"
[5ktt]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-07-03-5000m-tt %} "5000m TT (of sorts) (7 Jul 2020)"
[results]: https://www.atletiek.nu/wedstrijd/uitslagenonderdeel/35030/3000m/
