---
layout: post
title: "It's been a while"
date: 2025-01-25 15:00:00
tags:
  - injury
---

It's been a while. Not the running, but my desire to write any updates. I felt
in the mood today, so jotting thoughts down on the injury that caused the loss
of desire. Warning: brain dump.

In August 2023 (yes, three), I was running 120 km per week. In August 2023, I
was also doing a trip in Europe that involved a lot of walking. One week was
over 80 km of walking and that does not include the walking indoor, such as
museums. By the end of August 2023, my left knee hurt. Overuse, probably.
Though I would like to add that I also, at some point prior to the left knee
pain, went on my knees to look under the bed of a rental apartment before we
were leaving, bent down all the way, and thought "that did not feel right". I
still think about that moment.

I gave it a rest and took days to a week off. Things did not get better on
their own. Around mid September, I went to the kine (PT) that helped me through
my comeback from breaking my ankle. He went with the pain being overuse leading
to a badly inflamed patella tendon (a tendon at the front of the knee, just
south of the kneecap). I had a bunch of sessions with him, did more elliptical
and biking again, followed the strength routine he gave me religiously, as much
as I hated it. For the curious: lots of balancing on one leg, squats on one
leg, jumping on one leg, …

Things got better, slowly. Things broke down again, rapidly. Few bad nights of
sleep? Pain is back. Take an awkward step? Pain is back. Bit too intense knee
stretch (that the kine gave me)? Pain is back. It was a lot of overthinking of
every niggle in the area.

I was allowed to build up running again pretty swiftly. First run back was 28
September. Rest in-between runs was paramount. Run a day, two days without
running, run a day. Oddly enough I was allowed to up the distance every third
day of running. By December I was running over 20 km per run, but still taking
two off days between every run. By that point the kine had told me I could
continue on my own.

In the new year, I switched to three days of running. After three weeks of
that, I switched to every other day of running, then quickly switched back to
three days of running because I did not like how the knee felt. This was also
right after a trip to the USA, so my sleep was entirely messed up around that
time. Note that off days I still spent on an elliptical, a bike, or doing a
walk. On off days, I also kept up my routine of exercises the kine had given
me.

I stayed at three days of running per week for quite some time. Most weeks this
totalled up to around 53 km (15, 15, 23). Eventually, I settled on weekends
where I would do the long run on Saturday and a sometimes equally long walk on
Sunday. I kind of liked that setup, I managed to spend a lot of time in nature
that way. I still wished I were running more, but I coped. This continued till
the end of April 2024.

New May, new me, I switched to running every other day. I toned down the
weekend walking because I did not have the time any more, but kept biking
(mostly bike commute) and ellipticaling on the off days. The knee seemed to be
holding up, but from what I recall it would still randomly hurt depending on
the day.

Besides a transatlantic flight messing up my schedule and my sleep, June and
July were pretty consistent in continuing every other day. I was also still
doing the kine routine, I had settled on some exercises I did not hate
entirely. I also had more free time in those two months, so did more walking
again instead of elliptical. Biking was not an option.

August was another Euro trip. A year on from the last one, I played it a lot
safer. We did not walk as much and I definitely did not run as much. I toned it
down those weeks, squeezing in a recovery jog here-and-there. I averaged around
27 km per week for those three weeks.

The latter half of August I got back into the alternating days of running and
things felt fine. Mid September I switched to four days of running, totalling
about 60 km per week, and I did not fall apart.

At some point in September and October I think I gave up on the kine routine. I
noticed the stretching involved in it would from time to time mess up my
patella tendon. I had grown weary of it and that was the drop. I now wonder
whether that (sometimes intense) stretching was actually hurting it more. The
stretch in question was sitting on your knees and do a controlled descent of
your butt towards to heels of your foot. When I started this ordeal, I could
not come very close at all. By this point in time, I could easily sit down
entirely into the stretch, but sometimes I felt that a tiny niggle in the
patella tendon would exacerbate and hurt way more because of this move.

Either way, the running went well enough. I was still worrying about a bad
night of sleep or a misstep ruining things (and sometimes it did still create
small setbacks in how the knee felt), but by and large the worst seemed finally
behind me. I started more properly thinking about my future running again.

In November 2024, I moved to five days of running per week, hitting about
64 km. I also reintroduced doing a workout once a week. I call it Lactate
Threshold, but I do not think I am hitting that. I cannot move my legs very
fast any more, that will have to improve again over time. Still, it felt good
to create a bit of a burning lung feeling again, even if it was not all that
special. I reintroduced taking a down week every fourth week, now that it was
beginning to feel more again like I could use it.

December saw some more transatlantic travel, but I (and the knee) managed. In
January I switched to six days of running a week. 70 km total, three of the
days are recovery jogs.

I am just finishing a down week this week (and have reintroduced strides) with
my eye on running 75 km the coming weeks. Of course, yesterday I made a misstep
in a deeper patch of snow and today my left knee area hurts. Strangely enough
it is further south than (the usual pain I felt in) the patella tendon. That
will be a day off today and a reevaluation tomorrow.

I have noticed I am more at ease with where I am at. I still want to be fast, I
still wish I were running more, I still have hopes of running good races. I
will continue working towards those goals. However, making the decision to take
that day off today came easy. Easier than it would have before the injury. Yes
I am still annoyed with today and the past, but I am more accepting of my
situation. I do not have as much free time as I used to. I cannot run as many
different routes as I used to (for heatmap purposes, more on that if I feel
like writing another post). But I am still running. I do still love it.

I chug on.
