---
layout: post
title: "American Long Dumb Shit"
date: 2025-05-16 18:00:00
tags:
  - heatmap
  - long dumb shit
---

In my heatmapping I have the number-goes-up street and hexagon progress to
focus on. However, sometimes I just want to do something… sillier. That is
where my little adventures come into play. The ideas I lovingly refer to as my
_Long Dumb Shit_.

In Belgium, I would often plan these around train lines. Go to one stop, run to
the next. Repeat. Here, I do not have that luxury. Instead, I have to drive
somewhere and do a loop (or convince my wife to also waste half her day).
Progress is a little slower, but I do not mind.

## My Blob

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250516-long-dumb-shit/blob.avif' description='The PA blob in its current state.' %}

Besides the obvious activity around where we live, I have been creating
tendrils vaguely in the cardinal directions. The north and then west one
follows the "Horse Shoe Trail". East is aiming to connect Philadelphia's center
city. South came to be from having to drop my wife off at the Wilmington train
station and evolved into another sillier idea. West was more in the process of
checking out some parks and nature areas and then wanting to hook them up. For
those north, south, and west tendrils I have further ideas. More on them later
in this post.

Now, there are still various loose miniblobs. Philadelphia is the most obvious
one, but I will get around to that eventually. The connection itself is easy:
there is a paved trail along the river. I figure I will be heading in that
general direction at some point and try to do it at that point.

The other loose miniblobs are just part of natural progress for now. Some from
races, others from checking out a different park or nature reserve, some just
from feeling like doing a few neighbourhoods of streets. I am not (yet) as
crazy about keeping every new place connected yet as I had become in Belgium. I
will connect them, at some point, no rush.

## Horse Shoe Trail

<!-- TODO: Add picture of the actual yellow horseshoe hanging somewhere -->

The Horse Shoe Trail is a 230 km long route connecting Valley Forge to the
Appalachian Trail. I believe I first encountered this trail nearly a decade ago
by accident while running in Valley Forge. Specifically up Mount Joy and Mount
Misery there. After that, I mostly did not think about it any more for quite
some time.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250516-long-dumb-shit/hst.avif' description='Where the Horse Shoe Trail (in red) will be taking me. Start is around the King of Prussia and Norristown text on the map\'s east side. The end is in the north west.' %}

Until the past year that is. I have been slowly chipping away at it when I am
in the mood. It was easy enough at the start, all of that is quite nearby, but
by now requires a decent bit of driving to reach my next point. I am about
halfway through it. As with all things, there is no rush. That said, this is
definitely my main Long Dumb Shit goal, time permitting.

One of the weirder challenges with this has been, at times, finding a
convenient place to park the car. That is partially on me, I would like to
trace the trail if possible. In other words, no matter where I park, I need to
still connect to the HST. I cannot just connect my blob in the general
direction.

Just as a side note for non-American readers (or non native English speakers,
perhaps): while this is called the Horse Shoe _Trail_, it is not all on trail.
The word trail evokes a certain state of the path to me. The people managing
this trail do try to get land access for that kind of path, but there are
chunks where you are running on streets rather than a beaten path. They also
have something called "rail trails" here, which, at least in my area, seems to
largely be asphalt bike and walking paths following a former train line. No
_trails_ in sight.


## Visiting the Capital

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250516-long-dumb-shit/dc-plans.avif' description='That is a nice capital you have got down there. Circles indicate points that will get a special mention in this section. Arrows give an idea of the connections to make.' %}

Philadelphia is nestled nicely in the middle between New York City and
Washington DC. After connecting so many things in Belgium, it seemed obvious:
connect all three together. I do not recall whether I had had this idea before or whether it
formed while I was making my Wilmington (Delaware) connection. At the very
least, the latter solidified the idea in my head.

This plan will be a total pain to actually get around to. It rather quickly
becomes a drive™ and, unlike with the Horse Shoe Trail, I doubt I will be able
to find nice nature running on this route.

Practically, I have made the focus of this idea the DC side. My wife sometimes
needs to be in DC for work, her brother lives there, there is just more chance
of us heading in that direction. I figure I might be able to sometimes squeeze
in a run when we do so. Eventually there will be some progress.

The very shortest route (read: definitely not the one I will be able to take)
between my blob and the one in DC is 161 km. At a rate of "maybe I will make
some progress every 6 months" (at least once the first few 10s of km of that
are done) I think this will be a very long term goal indeed. Still, a boy can
dream.

The distance is not even the first main hurdle to tackle here. Do you see that
big blue river there cutting through? That is the Susquehanna river and I have
to cross that. I had a look at the bridges across it and **THEY ARE ALL
HIGHWAYS**. Come on, America, stop hating everyone else. OK, some are
"highways", so more like state routes, but I still could not spot sidewalks or
shoulders I would feel safe on. As I get closer, I will have a better look at
all the bridges again, but for now I only see three options:

1. Cross all the way in the north west of this map, at Harrisburg. Not my
   preferred option. The only option that seems to actually have a sidewalk.
2. Try crossing safely at Norman Wood Bridge / Holtwood Road, that is the
   crossing you see if you start at Lancaster and follow the map straight
   south. _Technically_ this is supposed to be part of the "Conestoga Trail
   System", a marked trail. In reality (or at least, going by Google Maps
   Streetview), it looks like a very narrow unmarked shoulder (read: a slightly
   wider lane) on a bridge where I would fear for my life if I saw a truck
   coming.
3. Once a year in September (I should check up on that), there is a running
   race that uses the highway bridge near Havre de Grace. That is the point
   right before the river turns into a lake / bay. The plan is simple: sign up
   for that with the sole purpose of crossing the river. Even if my map is not
   close to it at that point, I will feel obligated to sign up just to check
   that part off.

For the time being, I am dismissing option one. I will get close to Harrisburg
as I continue the Horse Shoe Trail, but it is just such a far way down from
there.

Coincidentally, option two might be an alright option. Notice that tendril
heading due west from the blob? I was planning on connecting that to the "Enola
Low Grade Trail" a rail trail that goes further west (and eventually a bit
north). If I make that connection anyway, I can use it to connect from the
Enola Low Grade Trail down south to the Norman Wood Bridge. Cross there and
head south-south-west towards Baltimore. There seems to (eventually) be a
Baltimore light rail stop on the north end of the city that could help with
making the connection further to Baltimore proper.

Meanwhile, option three would see me continue the tendril that passes by
Wilmington and because of the running race would give a safe bridge passage
(which cannot be guaranteed in option two). From there, too, the plan would be
to continue to Baltimore. This one _might_ be manageable depending on the exact
train coverage in this area. The plan would then be to drive down to a train
station, go to another stop, connect the two. No looping needed. I don't know
whether the train coverage is feasible for this.

Both option two and three would result in me reaching Baltimore's Camden
Station. A train station on the south side of its downtown (by the looks of the
map). There seems to be a commuter train between there and DC, but it does not
seem to run on weekends. I'll figure that out once I get closer. Either way,
the aim would be to connect to Greenbelt: the north-east end of the green line
of the DC metro network. Once there, it's a simple connection to what I already
have in DC.

## Schuylkill River Trail

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250516-long-dumb-shit/srt.avif' description='The Schuylkill River Trail in red. Connecting Philadelphia to Reading along the banks of the Schuylkill river.' %}

The Schuylkill River Trail (SRT) is another bike path. I had been doing parts
of the SRT to connect down to Philadelphia, but nothing more. The SRT wasn't a
focus. Heck if I am being honest, even connecting to Philadelphia hasn't been
much of a focus. I just don't feel like driving in that direction for a run
that does not sound like it will be pretty.

However, as I am thinking about things to list here, I would say that is a
likely candidate in terms of easier sidequests. At the very least connecting
things to Philadelphia really should happen at some point. A good chunk of the
river is also not that far from us, so it is a bit easier to get to.
Furthermore, it will finally let me get around to connecting the heatmap from
some races to the rest of my blob.

In case you read this and know Dutch: yes, Schuylkill is a Dutch word. I
encourage you to pronounce it that way, even if the locals won't understand
you.

## Other Side Quests: Enola Low Grade Trail, Conestoga Trail, Perkiomen Trail

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250516-long-dumb-shit/sidequests.avif' description='The Enola Low Grade Trail (east-west), the Conestoga Trail (north-south on the west side), and the Perkiomen Trail (north-south on the east side).' %}

As mentioned in the DC section, there is a trail called the Enola Low Grade
Trail that I am hoping to connect to with my west pointing tendril. Another one
I heard about is Conestoga Trail, which crosses the Enola Low Grade Trail,
crosses Norman Wood Bridge (again, see the DC section), and also on its north
end connects to the Horse Shoe Trail. Finally there is the Perkiomen Trail,
which on the other side, branching off the Schuylkill River Trail and follows
Perkiomen Creek.

Of these, I would say the Enola Low Grade Trail is the priority. Both for how
it will look on the map and because it will, apparently, maybe make my
connection to DC easier.

Once that one is complete and I have progressed enough along the Horse Shoe
Trail, I feel like Conestoga Trail might connect things nicely together. I am
not convinced about this one yet, it is more me taking notes of busy work
further down the line.

Finally, I believe that the Perkiomen Trail is not very long. I just need to
get in the mood to make progress on that. It does not connect me to anything I
particularly care about and it will not look particularly nice on the map, so,
ye.

## Jotting Down Other Ideas

_~~Suggestions welcome~~ Stupid ideas encouraged._

- As briefly mentioned in the DC section, connecting to New York City would
  also be nice. I just have done nothing for that nor thought it out in any
  form.
- Connecting south east to Atlantic City (New Jersey) is something that I
  sometimes wonder about. I have some runs in NJ that I would connect on the
  way there and it seems like it would be a pretty straight line across NJ.
- I am not in any way used to camping or multiday walking. I do not have
  camping gear. Anyway, walking and camping a section of the Appalachian Trail
  sounds appealing. Maybe start with just a weekend?
- Once I have finished the Horse Shoe Trail, I might be tempted to connect it
  to Harrisburg anyway.
- Write my name somewhere that I am unlikely to run through in the future. Make
  it big enough that you cannot miss it when looking at my heatmap and having,
  say, both DC and Philadelphia in view. If feeling less egocentric: draw
  something.
- In Belgium, I had connected the Netherlands and France borders. Here in
  Pennsylvania, I found out there is a [Holland, New
  Jersey](https://www.openstreetmap.org/relation/964662#map=13/40.59336/-75.14297)
  right across the eastern border with New Jersey. There is also a [Paris,
  Pennsylvania](https://www.openstreetmap.org/node/153971133#map=13/40.40239/-80.49279)
  right before the western border with Ohio. The shortest route seems to be
  about 536 km and I never have to go west like that, so chances are pretty
  slim, but you know, adding it to the ideas box.


The end of this post feels a bit rushed again. I was getting tired of writing
things out (planning them out is much more fun! actually running them even more
so!) and wanted to just get it out there. Apologies for any mistakes.
