---
layout: post
title: "Natuurloopcriterium Lier 10 km"
date: 2016-11-26 21:00:00
tags: report
---

One of my goals for 2016 was to drop below 40 minutes on the 10 km. I gave it a
shot in August without any specific training. It was flat, it was hot. [I
failed to go sub 40, but set a PR at 41:35][belgchamp]. With the year running
on its end, I had decided on a late November race to have a proper go at this,
with proper training. The field of battle: the first event of the
[Natuurloopcriterium Lier][natuurloop] on 26 November.

## Training

As a plan I started from Pete Pfitzinger's lowest 10 km plan, adding some more
distance to fit with where I was at the start of the plan. I lowered the
relative peaking in terms of distance (relative to the first few weeks).
VO2max and speed workouts I kept the same. VO2max workouts consisted mostly of
repetitions of 1000 metre at 3-5k race pace. Speed workouts were repetitions of
about 200 metre at 800 metre to 1 mile race pace. For tempos I made a slight
adjustment in terms of the progression, but nothing major. All the tempos were
LT intervals. I also extended the plan a bit at the front as I had 15 weeks
till the start of the race rather than 12 weeks. So far for the theory.

Alas, in practice it was not quite so. On the first speed workout, during the
13th week before race week, I got injured.  I was doing the speed workout on
the road and one of the intervals happened to be on an uphill. My left hip felt
a bit odd when suddenly it felt like a tendon or muscle shifted over the bone
on the side. Things hurt, I immediately abandoned the workout. I still had to
run about six kilometre home though.  Two days later I thought it had rested
enough (this was not the case) and ran an endurance run. After that I finally
wizened up and took a week off.

After the week of rest, I could run again. The pain was gone, but the hip
remained uncomfortable. This kept me on my toes for a while: at the least sign
of weakness from my hip, I gave up on workouts. The real fast parts (speed and
strides) I pretty much avoided altogether. My distance remained mostly what I
had planned out.  I broke my weekly distance record twice in a row right before
the first tune up race.

This [first tune up race][canalrun] was the fifth week before race week. It
went well, I ran 4 km in 14:21. However, I think I might have done it slightly
too fast. Since this is a race you mostly "train through", your plan does not
wait for you to recover, you have to be ready for the next run immediately. It
seems I might not have been ready and for two weeks I struggled with a very
tight right calf, borderline painful at times. This did not stop me in the
fourth week before race week, I broke my weekly distance record again, setting
it at 73.9 km. The week after, i.e., the third week before race week, I did
take things easier than planned: slightly less distance, no workouts.

The short taper for the [second tune up race][vrede] finally fixed the right
calf.  I ended up racing that race more conservatively simply due wanting not
to blow up during the race, but I guess I could have claimed I did not want to
be unable to recover. I ran those 4 km in 15:10. After that race, disaster
struck.

I got sick. Fever, coughing, phlegm, snot, throat in ruins, and in need of
hours and hours of extra sleep. Running was out of the question and I was less
than 14 days away from race day. Seven days out I gave running a try, thinking
I was feeling better, but my body was not quite there yet. I needed more days
off and race day was fast approaching. In the end, I gambled on hoping my
training had been enough and that my body would be there when it needed to be.
I did not run at all till Friday, the day before the race. On Friday I ran 5 km
at recovery pace with some strides sprinkled in. My heart rate was higher than
I wanted, but running did not feel impossible.  I decided I would indeed take
part.

## Course Details

It is a flat course! That is the main reason I picked this one out. It runs
along the rivers in Lier, so except for some short bumps for bridges, there is
no elevation to be found. Those bumps suck the pace out of you, but at least
they are quickly over with. Running along the river also makes the course
pretty uneventful, but that is OK, I am not here for the scenery.

The start is near the track where the finish is. After 1.6 km you come at a
bridge you have to cross to run back on the other side.  In other words two
short right angle turns in quick succession. I will refer to this as a bridge
turn, there are some more further down the line. At about 2.2 km, there is a
turn slightly larger than a right angle.  Next you are good for a while, turn
left under a bridge around 3.8 km and then right immediately to continue in the
same direction as before the bridge.  Around 4.7 km there is another turn
larger than a right angle. At 6.7 km you have another bridge turn. About 1 km
from the end, a last bridge turn has to be completed. Once you reach the track
where the finish lies, you have to completely one lap to be home free.

The bridge turns were pretty nasty. On the bridge itself you could only go on
the sidewalk, so you had to turn very sharply. This takes your pace away
completely.  Throughout the race, these and the random short bumps really hurt
me.

## Goals and Strategy

I signed up for this race with only one goal: going sub 40. Despite the
sickness, I decided to stick to that. Just go for the pace and either make it
or crash and burn. Right before the race, I was ready to give myself a slight
concession and also be happy with a PR (i.e., faster than 41:35). The strategy
remained the same though: aim for sub 40.

## Race Day

## Race

## Results

[belgchamp]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-08-06-belgian-championship-10km-road %} "Belgian Championship 10 km road"
[natuurloop]: https://www.natuurlopenvanlier.be/
[canalrun]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-10-22-brussels-canal-run %} "Brussels Canal Run 4 km"
[vrede]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-11-11-jogging-van-de-vrede %} "Jogging van de Vrede 4 km"
