---
layout: post
title: "Les 10km de l'ULB"
date: 2017-04-23 21:00:00
tags:
- report
- volunteer
---

A bit of a change from the usual! Due to injury-ridden January and February, my
fitness is nowhere near where I would want it to be. A pity for spring racing
season. The 2017 edition of the first race I ever ran, [Les 10km de
l'ULB][10kulb] was coming up and I knew I was not going to get in a shape to
speak of. I would not be happy with whatever result I could run. Instead, I
decided to volunteer.

## Training

The organisation sent us (the girlfriend decided to also volunteer) a list of
keywords for questions we might receive from runners. I made sure to study
it/read it a few times as well as looking at the map of the area a few times to
make sure I knew what was where (think bag drop off, bib pick up, ...). Since
we were in the list for bib handout, the girlfriend also practised her
listening comprehension of French numbers.

## Race Day

The race would start at 10:30. The organisation had asked us to be present at
8:00. Some others had to be there at 6:00 already, so that could have been
worse. We woke up at 6:00 and did not care too much about our morning routine.
The organisation said that there would be some croissants for us, but my
experience with relying on a breakfast like that is that I am usually left
hungry. So, I had a bowl of muesli. We calmly got ready and were out the door
a little past seven. The girlfriend went by public transportation and I biked.
We both arrived nicely at 8:00, within a few minutes of one another.

We were given a T-shirt and one croissant each. Good thing I had that bowl of
muesli. The girlfriend was happy to also make use of their coffee. Nobody
really told us what to do so we stood around for a bit. I saw some people
offloading fruits and drinks, so I helped them for a bit. After that it was a
bit more standing around till a lady started placing cutting boards on the
tables. We started cutting oranges in four, did a few 100 of those. When the
oranges were taken care off, we started on the bananas. Bananas was just a
matter of cutting it in the middle so that people would not needlessly take too
much. The girlfriend and I made good time on the bananas. She placed them in a
row, I cut ten of them at once and placed them in the bins. I feel like the two
of us did half of the bananas they provided.

Once more we were out of a job. Nobody told us anything, but the mail they had
sent had stated we would be doing bib handout. So we walked to the bib stands,
but all seat were already covered by other volunteers and nobody seemed to be
in charge. We wandered around some more, not quite sure what to do. We ended up
at the T-shirt stand. People that had paid 10 euro extra (sign up fee without
the T-shirt was 6 euro for students and 10 euro for others) could come fetch
their T-shirt there. We saw there were some empty seats at this stand and just
one person behind the counter. We asked him if he could use a hand and joined
him. Someone else also joined us, so we ended up with four volunteers on a
pretty easy job. There never was a long queue to get T-shirts and half of the
people passing by seemed to just be asking for directions to the bib stand or
the changing rooms.

As the start time neared, our area got emptier and emptier. When the start was
about to be given, we went outside our stand for some elevation to see people
go.  Funny in a way how *long* of a time there is between the shot and the
people all the way at the back even being able to move.  When I am in the thick
of things I never really notice that as much.

After the big crowd had left for the run, some latecomers still passed us
running to the start line.  We packed up most of our stand and walked back to
the area of the fruits and drinks.  As you can expect with a 10 km, there is
about 30 minutes of nothing happening between the start and the first finisher.
Even after the first finisher things are not very active since the bigger crowd
is of course another 10+ minutes behind him.

[belgchamp]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-08-06-belgian-championship-10km-road %} "Belgian Championship 10 km road"
[10kulb]: http://www.10kmulb.org/
