---
layout: post
title: "12-urenloop VUB and Plantentuinjogging Meise"
date: 2017-05-14 12:00:00
tags: report
---

So this one is actually two reports combined into one. Why? Two reasons:

1. The 12-urenloop happened on 10 May. The Plantentuinjogging on 14 May.
2. The plan was not to _race_ race either of them. The 12-urenloop should be
   taken easy enough so that I was fully recovered to pace the girlfriend in
   the Plantentuinjogging.

It felt a bit silly to do those separate, so here we are.

## Training

I had some injuries throughout January and February, leading me to cancel most
of my spring plans. Instead, it was base building time again. History has made
me cautious, so the weeks before the races I have only been in the 50s km
range, spread over five days. The week before the race I made that six days,
the first time I had ever run five days in a row, let alone six. All of the
runs have been easy (GA in Pfitz terms) with some recovery and some strides
sprinkled throughout. One increase in intensity at a time I figure and for now
I just want to up my distance again first.

## Course Details

### 12-urenloop

The concept here is that teams compete against one another over a time period
of 12 hours. The course consists of one ~575 metre long loop (as measured by my
GPS). Members of the team complete the loop as often as possible. You *have* to
switch every lap, so you are essentially running almost 600 metre and then
waiting for your next turn. In practice this meant 2-3 minutes of waiting per
other person running and usually you are not lucky enough to only have to wait
for one other person. My colleague had convinced me to run for one of the
weakest teams in the line up (they were second to last last time). The
reasoning was that we could get a timeslot of one hour and just run between the
two of us, minimising the waiting time.

Besides an awful downhill turn on earth with tree roots sticking out at the
start, the course is on either asphalt or on the campus track. There are three
bottlenecks: that awful turn (since you want the main path), the entrance to
the track, and the exit of the track. Besides that the teams area is pretty
crowded at all times but you can mostly get through unscathed.

### Plantentuinjogging

For this one, I will just refer to my description from [last
year][plantentuin2016]. The course is unchanged, though some rain in the past
days made the grassy parts too soft and created several puddles and muddy
patches.

## Goals and Strategy

For our one hour slot at the 12 urenloop I figured I would take a lap or two to
warm up, go hard for a while, and then possibly do some cool down in the laps.
With how bad their team did last time, I figured it might still help them. I
did have the intention of not going too fast since I wanted to be rested enough
to pace the girlfriend.

The Plantentuinjogging only had the goal of having the girlfriend repeat last
year's victory and set a new CR in the process. She set the CR last year, but
took it a bit easy at times so that was a *soft* one in a way. I did not
consider myself really race ready yet (i.e., capable to equal or improve on
last year's performance), but a tempo like effort could have been enough to
pace her anyway.

## 12-urenloop Race

We arrived shortly before 18:00 and found the team to actually have quite a bit
of people ready and willing to run. So far for our calm one hour of alternating
between the two of us. All pacing plans quickly went out the window too. When I
got handed the baton the first time, I immediately raced off, forgetting all
about my warm up. Excitement of the crowd, I guess? I am never good at taking
race starts easy and this one would have a lot of them. Each of them I went out
too fast.

I quickly noticed I was not going to get as much running in as I had hoped for
and decided to run another hour for a team more dear to me, that of the science
student group. The waiting was much longer than anticipated. On the flipside,
this made the laps I did do faster without getting to me as much at the time.
In that second hour, the sun became an annoying distraction too. It was setting
and getting closer to the horizon. To see your teammates coming, you had to
squint westward into that setting sun.

Most laps were uneventful, but some laps dragged me into racing a bit more. In
one of them someone started right as I passed their team's stand, I immediately
tried to make sure I dropped him (and succeeded). In another two girls were
ahead of me in the first 100-200 metre as I slowly reeled them in. Passed one
easily enough, but the other gave a bit more trouble. Once I reached her around
the halfway mark, she slowed down quite a bit though. Guess she went too hard,
I quickly left her.  In a third, our teammate that ran before us arrived with
both our baton and the baton of another team. I was rather confused with that
until I passed a member of the other team, lying in the grass on the side,
looking a bit dazed. Still not sure what happened there. Finally every hour had
a "fun" lap. The two I witnessed was a naked round at 18:00 and a run in
flippers at 19:00. Much to nobody's surprise, the naked run had pretty much
just men. One girl braved it as well, but ran the entire loop while covering
and holding her breasts. I cannot blame her, it sounds terribly painful
otherwise.

Finally, here is a bit of an overview of my laps (and waiting time).

|Lap|Time|Wait till next|
|--------------|
|1|2:14|7:49|
|2|2:16|9:50|
|3|2:09|6:53|
|4|2:09|11:19|
|5|2:11|2:25|
|6|2:18|2:32|
|7|2:18|4:27|
|8|2:15|10:12|
|9|2:17|9:13|
|10|2:18|7:36|
|11|2:16|1:59|
|12|2:23|7:18|
|13|2:21||

That is a median time of 2:16 and waiting time of 7:27 (averages of 2:15 and
6:47). Quite a bit harder than I had planned to do and without warming up.
After two laps above 2:20, I decided to call it a day. I was nearing the two
hour mark, clearly losing my edge, and the girlfriend was waiting at home
expecting me to only run one hour. The [Strava activity][strava12uren] for your
enjoyment.

## The Inbetweener Period

I was dead tired that evening and quickly decided that I did not want to get up
early and run my planned recovery. Instead I would do it in the evening, after
work. I did still bike to work and back. In the final kilometre on the way
back, however, I felt a twinge in my right achilles twice shortly after one
another.  As I walked around the house, that area was also quite noticeable.
Achilles injuries scare me, so I decided to skip the planned recovery run
altogether.

For Friday morning I had planned another recovery run. However, I woke up for a
bathroom break around 4:30 at night and still felt the achilles.  It kept me
worried and I decided to skip Friday's recovery run as well. The girlfriend was
giving me some looks, she did not want me to fail to pace her on Sunday. During
Friday afternoon the achilles feeling cleared up and in the evening I briefly
debated squeezing a run in. Instead we played it lazy and did a movie night
with Chinese take out.

Saturday morning we went for a 6k recovery with some strides together. My
calves felt terrible at the start (does not help that I did not foam roll at
all the past days, I guess). During the strides, I did not drop her as easily
as I normally do. On top of that, I rather felt my quads during the strides.
Suffice to say, I was not feeling overly confident for Sunday.

And then things got worse. The girlfriend had a bit of a cough/snot going
during the day and that got worse during the night.  She did not sleep much and
had a headache. Oh boy.

## Plantentuinjogging Meise Race

### Race

We still went out there to just give it a try. I have a feeling if it were not
for me though, she might have skipped it altogether.  As it is, we arrived
there around 12:15 for a 13:00 race start, quickly went through the motions of
getting ready and did a short warm up. We lined up near the startline. I wanted
to be on the startline, but the girlfriend did not care as much.  There were
some kids in front of us that would start with a sprint and then die anyway.
Soon after three old ladies also went to stand there. I have no clue what they
thought they were doing there, but I could not squeeze past them without
feeling rude too.

As soon as the start signal was given, the girlfriend squeezed next to them on
the left. I got stuck immediately as the three ladies started some slow
jog-walk-thing. I thought "fuck being rude" and pushed myself through them with
my hands. Do not stand on the front line if you do not belong at all...

I ran towards the girlfriend and adjusted to her pace. I always start too
quick, so in the first several 100 metre I would just follow her and let her
set the pace. After about 300 metre we turn into the park where most of the
race is run. I see one girl up ahead, so she is immediately the main target.

<!-- TODO Was it around 1km? Check with a map and hope I remember D: -->

We seem to be going at an OK pace and move closer to her. Around the 1 km mark
we catch up to her, but also get caught up to by another woman. We have also
started climbing some and I feel like it is not going super smooth for the
girlfriend. I let her set the pace here since she is usually better at uphills.
In the downhill I take the lead again to make sure she does not ease up too
much. On the flatter ground right after I feel like she is having trouble to
keep up. I manually click the lap button when I see the 2km pass by (I had
forgotten to turn on autolap). Just over nine minutes for two km, slower than
we should be going. My own heart rate is only in the low 160s.

As we start climbing again, a girl and her father (?) pass us. The girlfriend
starts to slow down some more.  The sickness is getting to her. As it gets
worse, I ask her how things are feeling. She says DNFing sounds nice. Yikes.
She ends up deciding to walk for a bit and then see where her body takes her. I
will continue on without her.  We are at this point 2.8 km in the race, covered
in a bit over 13 minutes. She is third female.

I get going and see 3 km pass by on my watch, manually pressing lap again. That
lap was 5:17.  I do not recall whether the 3 km sign was nearby at this point.
I quickly spot the second female and pass her.  I pick up people that passed us
earlier one by one. TODO Around the merging point (distance?) I fall in behind
a group with a younger kid in it with the idea of following them briefly to
regain composure. This does not last even 100 metre as I still feel I have
plenty left in the tank. I press the lap button as I pass the 4km sign. Time of
3:27, the GPS tells me that lap was about 800 metre.

As I suffer through ups and downs, grass and mud, I sometimes see the first
female in the distance. She seems _too far_, though I make it my mission to try
my best to pass her still. Defending the girlfriend's honour, clearly. The 5km
sign is 1km behind the 4 km sign according to my GPS (this is not self evident
in Belgium). Lap time: 4:20. As I run downwards to a section where the route
briefly touches on an earlier point, I hear someone yell.  The girlfriend is
running again which feels reassuring (TODO How much km behind is she here?).
She later tells me she also saw the first female a bit ahead of me and "within
reach". I however do not see her and think I will be too late. I pass the 6 km
sign with a lap time of 4:30.

At this point there is a downhill and a water stand. Without breaking my
stride, I grab a cup of water, pour it over my head, and throw it in the trash
in one smooth movement. My own perception of this event is confirmed by a
spectator yelling that looked nice. I leave the park and see the first female
up ahead, turning a corner.  As I go around the corner myself, I see her on the
next uphill. This one starts out very gradually and I already see her
struggling. A biker is next to her to show her the way (and probably some
encouragement). I creep closer by, not quite catching her yet. However, I
remember this section from last year.  There is a right turn up ahead after
which the gradual uphill becomes, essentially, a wall upwards. Total buzz- and
legkiller.

As I make the turn, I see she has not gotten very far yet. She is dying.  I
decide to give it an extra boost up the hill. I know I can basically give it my
all upwards since there is a slight downhill right after. I definitely can stay
ahead of her on a downhill. I pass her a bit over halfway this final nasty
climb and zoom off.  The biker jokingly yells at me something along the lines
of "Is that a way to treat a lady?". I just extend my arms in a shrug and
continue.  I crest the hill and cruise to the finish. Lapped the 7 km sign
somewhere in that climb in 4:09 and the final bit (366 metre says the GPS
watch) at 4:00 pace.

### Results

TODO Links.

The official results have me at 32:12, putting me as 13th overall, just under 6
minutes from the overall winner. Slower than the girlfriend's CR from last year
as well, so I know her CR will not be broken by today's winner. The female
winner finished in 32:24. The girlfriend still clocked in fifth somehow, but
just over five minutes behind the female winner.

The GPS clocked in at 7144 metre in 32:18. The 2.8 km with the girlfriend were
done at an average of 4:43 pace and 163 heart rate. The 4.3 km without her was
at 4:23 and 180 respectively. All in all I felt pretty great still after the
race, which was nice.

## Future

I do not have any immediate race goals. I will just continue building a base
distance-wise for a while longer and getting used to six days of running a
week. Immediate future has two conferences (or four, technically) that will zap
my energy. They and their travel fall between 18 May (yes, four days after the
race) and 11 June. I will have to make sure I do not kill my legs during those
lack-of-sleep days. I figure keeping distance steady should be enough.

After all that I want to get back to 70 km a week and get very used to that.
Maybe I will decide on a fall half to keep things goal-oriented. (I think the
girlfriend showed some interest in Copenhagen).


[plantentuin2016]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-05-16-plantentuinjogging-meise %} "Plantentuinjogging Meise 2016"
[strava12uren]: https://www.strava.com/activities/980129271
