---
layout: post
title: "Jogging '80"
date: 2018-10-07 18:00:00
tags:
- report
---

As a little kid, I would sometimes run a bit with my father. Nothing serious.
He would take part in a race near where we lived and I took part in their kids'
race a few times. To feed my nostalgia, I decided to take part in it last year.
Sadly, that coincided with my seasonal sore-throat-and-worse sickness. I still
ran it, since I was on the getting better side, but it was miserable and I was
slow: [44:37 for 10 km][lastyearstrava]. The course is probably a bit short too
going by everybody's Strava, so it is even slower than it already looks.

This year, I wanted revenge. Besides the kids option, they offer a 5, 10, 15,
and 20 km. I once more decided on the 10 km.

## Training

Training for my half marathon in a month has been going well enough. I have
been hovering at 80 km for the on weeks, 60 km for the off weeks. The body has
been alright in handling some of the T, R, and I workouts (Jack Daniels
terminology). The week before race week was a third 80 km week in a row. I was
also at a conference during that week, so while I dropped the heavy workouts,
it still was hard on the body. Instead of the usual workouts, I did two long
runs that week. While in a constant tiredness state, by the end of the
conference, it felt like I got through it alright.

However. The conference ended Friday, so Saturday and Sunday I got to catch up
on some sleep. My body must have dropped its defences after coming off that
intensity (is that even a thing?), because Sunday I started to feel a sore
throat develop. By the evening I was hella tired, had a slight headache, and a
throat that was getting worse. I stayed home sick Monday and Tuesday, pumping
myself full of teas, honey, and throat medicine.  Wednesday things started
feeling on the up again, which is a good sign. If it gets bad for me, it
usually takes a week of feeling complete shite. Luckily, it did not get to that
level yet. I was not feeling 100% necessarily on Thursday, but good enough to
head back to work. The tea and such continued.  Friday I started feeling tired
in the afternoon (I had been sleeping 9h-9h30 every night since Friday
evening), but had to attend an alumni event at work. This lasted a bit longer
than I had had in mind and Saturday (8ish hours of sleep), I woke up feeling a
bit worse again: sneezing, runny nose, throat a bit worse again. That afternoon
I got a very slight fever. I had a paracetamol and went to bed early that
evening. Sleep did not come though and around midnight I felt feverish again.
Had a second paracetamol and eventually managed to sleep.

## Course Details

The race starts near the village's town hall on a non smooth stone road. You go
down for half a kilometre only to then go back up for the next half. You do
part of a lap of the local track, connect to another (properly asphalted)
street and then follow those for a while. This stays flattish till km 2. Then
the next kilometre is downhill. With three kilometres in the legs, you go off
the easy roads and into some local fields and forests. As a local friend of
mine pointed out: if you are already feeling it at this point, then you will
blow up. The next kilometre you climb back through first a forest and then
between fields. You can hope it has been dry recently (it luckily was for me)
or this part can be even worse. After a kilometre of that, you briefly (about
300 metre) go back onto roads, some asphalt, some the shitty non smooth stones
they like in this village. After that the local forest/park till you reach the
finish line area, completing one 5 kilometre loop. Though I reckon the loop is
a bit short.

## Goals and Strategy

I was thinking of going out at a little under 4 minutes per kilometre and
seeing how that feels. At least in the easier start this *should* be
manageable. In reality, I figured I would just see if I could get my heart rate
at the upper end of the Lactate Threshold estimate. For me, that should be in
the low 170s. If I find someone to run it with, all the better.

## Getting There

As mentioned in training, sleep and slight sickness made the last run up to the
start a bit worse.  Sunday morning I luckily felt OK in terms of sickness.
Definitely on the tired side, but what can you do? I had some pasta leftovers
as lunch. Girlfriend and I ended up biking over around 13:15, to be there
around 14:00, an hour before the start. A bit generous, but rather safe than
sorry. Sign up was smooth, the line was pretty short still, and after a brief
wait I changed into running clothes, dropped off my bag, and went for a 2k
warmup around 14:35. After that some dynamic stretches and trying to keep
myself a bit warm before the start. The sun helped. I think. It was ~15C and
sunny.

## Race

- Line up around 3rd row, outside of the first turn
- Enough room because of picking outside
- On the downhill start just try to get some sort of rhythm, impossible to tell
- From here on out pretty much only passing people (except the guy that overtook me back, #12)
- On the track try to sit behind a group of three, but they slowed down and broke up some
- On the streets pass some more people
- Downhill: drop the people I had passed that were hanging on
- Downhill last half: close in on a black kid
- Pass him soemwhere during the climbing
- Final km or so he clearly sped up and passed and dropped me, assume he is 5k. He is
- Finish first lap, decide I want to get to two guys I've been seeing in the distance for the past km or two (4-5s behind at first timing mat)
- Close the gap in the downhill
- Hang behind them
- One guy fades, I wait behind him a bit too long
- Close gap again on the other guy
- Sit behind him from before the track to a bit past it
- Pass him when we get onto the road
- Think he's close, but fix that in the downhill
- Ok throguh forest
- In a turn in the field I see a small group 50 metre (?) behind me
- Dont want to risk letting them return, keep pace honest
- Final km speed up slightly, they never come close

## Results

## Future

[lastyearstrava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1210410080
