---
layout: post
title: "Teltowkanal Halbmarathon"
date: 2018-11-04 18:00:00
tags:
- report
---

Somewhere in summer, I was looking for a fall goal to set. The girlfriend felt
we should combine a city trip with a race.  To do so, I felt it had to be a
half marathon length. Making the effort of flying somewhere for something
shorter felt like a bit of a waste.  Sadly, I did not know my work schedule at
the time yet, so that left us with very few options. Only the long weekend of 1
November to 4 November, I was sure to be able to travel.

The girlfriend searched around and stumbled on the Teltowkanal Halbmarathon
just south of Berlin on 4 November. Neither of us had been to Berlin, so that
worked out nicely. The longest I had raced so far were editions of the Brussels
20 km, a hilly race in the warmer weather of the end of May. I was on board
with finding out what I could do on a mostly flat course on a chilly day
instead.

After making my intentions clear on ARTC, it turned out that one of the others,
Johannes, had run this one last year and was planning on doing so again.
Competition!

## Course Details

You start facing a bridge over the Teltowkanal from the Berlin side. You cross
it to the Brandenburg side (~100m) and make a turn to the right.  You run out
300 metre, turn left and up, come onto a street and run back to the bridge. You
run a little bit onto the bridge again, but before crossing you turn right onto
a cement path along the canal. You are around 800 metre into the race at this
point. The first of two water stands (per lap) is also around here. You follow
this largely flat (there are maybe two little "peaks" of going up sharply going
up a few metres followed by going down again) and largely straight path till
you are a little over 3.5 km into the race. Then follows a brief little climb
towards a bridge which you cross to reach the Berlin side of the canal again.
Time to run back.

The ground on this side is less smooth. The first 800ish metre is alright,
if a bit bumpier than the other side. You get stamped earth with rocks (the
gravelly stuff you might find in park paths). The path is a bit narrower and
there might be some rocks or roots sticking out here and there. All the things
sticking out were marked with bright red paint. I do not know if the organisers
did this or if this is standard on this path, but I appreciated that. Next you
get 400-500 metre of actual road (and thus a lot of space). They also parked
the second water stand here. Things narrow again and the ground is a bit worse
then before, more things sticking out, some sand patches.  You get around 800
metre of this.

Over the next 100 metre you turn right and left while climbing on cobbles in
order to reach a wooden planks bridge.  Cross it (you are still on the same
side of the canal), head back down and reach a sandy path. The narrow path from
before still accommodated two people next to each other, now it becomes worse
than that. Lots and lots of roots and edges too. You suffer through this for
700ish metre, climb some cobble stairs, turn left, and arrive back at where you
started.

This loop is done three times for the half marathon. In the final lap, you run
to the other side of the bridge where the finish lies.

## Training

I outlined my original plan in my [planning of fall 2018][fall2018] and looked
back at parts of it in the reports of the races I did this cycle:

- [Brickfields parkrun (5 km)][brickfields] (9 weeks out)
- [Jogging '80 (10 km)][jogging80] (4 weeks out)
- [Brussels Canal Run (9 km)][bxlcanal] (2 weeks out)

Each of those reports have a "Training" section that reflects on the training
leading up to that race.  I will give the general outline here, some
highlights, and some more detail on ups and downs since the last race.

My main idea this cycle (and this year) has been to stay consistent and to not
overestimate my body's capabilities. I decided the "start" of this cycle was 11
weeks out from race week (so a 12 week plan, as many race plans are). Right
before this cycle, I had bumped my weekly distance to 80 km, a new all time
high for me. Most plans have you building up and peaking in distance during the
plan. I was however not willing to artificially drop my distance to start a
plan, nor was I willing to bump further than around that 80 km per week mark
during the plan. So that immediately scratched distance peaking. Instead I
decided to stick to 80 km weeks, with a rest week of 60 km every fourth week.

Intensity wise I will use Jack Daniels terms to explain. I did Tempos
throughout the cycle. The first four weeks also had a week with a Repetition, a
week with a Time Trial race, and a week with a race where no competition showed
up, so that turned into another Tempo. Next four weeks had two weeks with an
Interval session and another week with a race. The two weeks before the taper I
dropped some workouts due to feeling tired and not wanting to risk it. I just
did the one Tempo workout. Those two weeks ended with the [Brussels Canal
Run][bxlcanal] referred to before. I hope it goes without saying that
throughout all of this, I am also doing weekly Long runs and strides where I
think it fits in.

Most of this cycle went pretty well. Five weeks out I put my body through a lot
by also having to attend a conference, which ended up getting me sick (throat,
slight fever, super tired, that kind of stuff) on and off for about a week.
Since then I have been paying more attention to drinking hot teas and some
throat tablets when I think I feel it coming up. Besides that I had usual bouts
of tiredness and terrible sleep from time to time, my sleep has always been an
iffy thing. Still, nothing major that sidelined me.

My taper started after the Brussels Canal Run by dropping the distance to what
I run in recovery weeks (~60 km), but still keeping some workouts in.
Specifically: a tempo on Wednesday in week one, a slightly shorter long run on
Sunday in week one, and a race pace workout on Tuesday in race week. Those last
two especially gave me a great confidence boost and are two of the three
workouts I think I want to highlight from this training cycle.

### Highlighted Workouts

In chronological order.

1. [Interval / VO2max: 4Ã—1000 @ 3:40][vo2max4times1000] on 18 September 2018 (6
   weeks out). Aimed for 3:40 / km pace. Splits were -4, 0, 0, and -4. I
   believe this may be my first such workout where I picked the right pace, or
   rather, where I did not pick a pace with which I completely blew up. It was
   a glorious feeling at the time. The only nagging doubt at the time was
   whether I perhaps picked too slow a pace then. In retrospect, looking at
   what I have run since, I believe it was pretty much spot on.
2. [Long run: 16 km @ 4:21][finallongrun] on 28 October 2018 (7 days out). It
   it a bit cheating to take something from the more tapered body, but this run
   (and the next one) were such confidence boosters that I cannot exclude it.
   Unlike almost all of my runs, this was a flat run. The weather was also just
   great with a rainy start and about 10C. I did not aim for any particular
   pace during this run, with the hills in Brussels I have given up on that,
   and was just running by heart rate as always. I can tell you that clocking
   off these splits had me worried to the point that I thought my heart rate
   monitor might be broken, but really it was just a great feeling run.
3. [Race pace: 3 km @ 4:00][racepace] on 30 October 2018 (5 days out). After
   that great Sunday run, this was to be the final test and boy did it boost my
   confidence further. I split 3:57, 3:52, 3:57 and it just felt _easy_.

## Goals and Strategy

Before the start of the cycle, the goal was just to get a better pace than what
I ran at the 20 km door Brussel at the end of May.  I ran that one in 1:27:59,
which is 4:24 per km. The 20 km was a hot day on a hilly route, so I figured
that is the least I should be able to do.

Shortly into the cycle, Johannes said we should go for sub 90. He had already
beaten me handily several times in the ARTC Mooseleague races (track
distances). Not to be outdone again, I agreed with the idea. Internally,
however, I was wondering if that was not too fast. Sub 90 requires a 4:16 per
km pace which is already a decent chunk faster than what I ran in the 20 km.

About three weeks out from race day, I started thinking more seriously about
what pace I would be able to run.  I did not have a proper recent race to go
by, so I tried using my times from training to work back to a race pace.
Usually the tables expect you to enter a recent race time and they will tell
you what paces to train at. I figured if I manage some training runs on the
flat, I could work back from that to a race time to aim for. Doing so said I
should go sub 85 on the half. *Record stopping scratchy noise.* Wait, what?

*Note: I did not realise this at the time, but JD actually gives using a Tempo
as an option if you do not have a recent race to go by.*

Completely fearful of that idea, I decided to just pretend I was ready for such
a thing at my [next tune-up race][bxlcanal].  I used the same method to arrive
at a pace estimate and used that in the race.  It went quite well. Shortly
after followed two good workouts (highlighted above in the Training section)
during my taper.  These were the boosts I needed. My goal for the half marathon
would be to go sub 85. Strategy to get there was to just aim for even splits
throughout (4:02 per km), doing my own thing. If I blew up in the process, so
be it.

## Getting There in Pieces

I knew some travel would be required to take part in the race, but it ended up
a bit more than I bargained for.  Maybe a month out, the girlfriend's brother
said he would be in Barcelona.  We decided to meet up with him there since she
had not seen him in a while, we would be there from Friday to the Tuesday
before the race.  Sadly, there were some strikes in Brussels Airport that
forced us to use different airports. This extended the travel time from a few
hours to at least half a day and many uncomfortable bus hours added into the
already uncomfortable trip. This happened both in going and in returning from
Barcelona.

Luckily, getting to Berlin Wednesday evening was smooth.  However, I had
trouble sleeping in the hotel's bed: the mattress was old, hanging down too
much in the middle and I could feel the springs pressing against me. Thursday
night, I only slept five hours. Friday night, the same happened. A far cry from
the nine or more that I prefer. While slightly worrying, I am also often in a
not-enough-sleep situation, so I figured I could still make do.  It helped that
we changed to a hotel in Teltow the night before the race. The bed in this
hotel was better and after napping in it in the afternoon, I slept about nine
and a half hours during the night.

What had me worried as all hell was something else. Friday morning after the
first bites of breakfast (some "weltmeister" bread roll we had bought in a
Lidl), I felt my stomach cramping. I do not know if it was that bread, if it
was the pho from the night before, or something else. It hurt and it would hurt
whenever I ate something for that entire day.

After returning from a shakeout at the Hasenheide parkrun on Saturday, the
healing process started. By this I mean that I had diarrhoea throughout the
rest of the day. It sucked, but my stomach area felt a little bit better after
the first round. I tried my best to drink enough water to not get dehydrated.
Beside that I just let myself be miserable all day and hoped my body would fix
itself by the time the race started.

Morning of the race, this did not quite seem to be the case. Stomach still felt
so-so and there was still some bowel emptying.  I had a banana and some
"breakfast cookie" pack about three hours before the race and then just focused
on getting everything out and putting enough water in. In-between we picked up
the bibs from the start area.  I made good use of our hotel near the start (~1
km away) by just preparing and using the toilet right there. Eventually the
girlfriend and I jogged over at about 10:15, 15 minutes before the start of the
race. I did not see Johannes and people were already moving to line up at the
start.  We walked in the same direction, I took a quick pee on the side, and
squeezed in around the fifth row.  With a minute or two before the race start,
I heard my name. Johannes was another five rows or so back from me.  I waved
him good luck and got ready to race. I just hoped my bowels would leave me
alone.

## Race

I had been warned by Johannes that the start can be a mess. You have got about
1000 people starting on a road that quickly turns onto a path. My starting
close to the front and on the outside of the first turn seems to have mostly
mitigated that for me. I never felt trapped. Not everyone was as lucky.  That
first turn onto the smaller path has two bollards sticking out. Someone a metre
or two in front of me did not see them in time and took a tumble after hitting
one. At least the poles were packed in a soft material.

The start has a lot of people finding their pace. I pass some, I get passed by
others.  I briefly try sticking with a guy in a white shirt, but soon notice he
is going a bit fast for me (~3:50). I let him go and after some readjusting
fall in behind a short woman in black.  She ends up falling in behind a guy
with orange short and shoes. It seems I have found a group. This group is
working out nicely for me, keeping the pace up without too much thinking. The
non cemented side of the river path is a bit tricky, you cannot see the uneven
ground until pretty late due to the person running in front of you.

> Lap 1: ~27:30 (~4:00 / km)
>
> (no official splits, just estimating both distance and pace from GPS after
> the fact)

It goes great until 8 to 9 km in. Around then a few metre
gap appears between orange shorts and woman in black.  My watch tells me she is
going too slow. I move to close the gap, she tries to hold on.  The pacing
still does not feel quite right and the watch confirms this. I move up further
to the front of our group and start setting my own pace. I do not know how long
either of them stays on my tail, if at all.  For the rest of the race I have
to do my own pacing again.

> Lap 2: ~27:45 (~4:01 / km)

Pacing myself goes well until the start of the third lap. I start feeling a bit
tired and noticeably slow down some seconds due to mostly mental fatigue, I
think. I have clear trouble getting myself to get back to proper pace. After 2
km into that lap, someone in blue zooms past me. I briefly try to hold on, but
see my watch jump up to 3:45ish pace. I quickly decide not to follow, but to
try and use that speed up as the mental boost to get me back on track. It works
somewhat, but I still definitely feel slower than I did earlier in.

It does not help that it gets noticeably more crowded on the path as I pass
more and more people who are still on their second lap.  On the one side of the
river this is still OK. The cemented path is wide enough to easily overtake.
Once on the other side however, it gets narrow. The only word that came to mind
in German felt a bit too long to bother with, so I just used the French
"pardon" to try to get people's attention in time for them to make some room
for me. By and large that is enough, though beware the headphone users.

At the final water stand I grab a cup and empty it over my head. Nothing
special, that is what I try to do at every one of them I pass. However, I
notice a woman ensuring all the used cups are slid into one another in the
garbage bags. I throw my cup at the bag and somehow it makes the perfect line,
no tumbling around, and slides smoothly into the bag. That got me elated for
the first time this run.

On the final stretch of trail with holes and roots sticking out, one of those
dangers gets me.  I twist my ankle slightly with less than one kilometre to go.
Trying my best not to slow down, I start swearing in Dutch and French.  A guy
on his second lap that I was about to pass says something to me. I cannot
properly make it out, but I think it was an encouragement. I just hope he does
not think I was swearing at him. Either way, eager not to fuck this race up in
the final stretch, I focus on keeping my form good. This makes the ankle feel
alright and I continue on. I labour up the final stairs, squeeze out any sprint
I still have left, and take it home.

> Lap 3: ~28:10 (~4:05 / km)

## Results

The [results] peg me at 1:23:48, [Strava] is a second quicker. Note that the
Strava activity is quite a bit shorter than 21.1 km. While my watch seems to
lowball the distance often, the discrepancy seems a bit bigger than usual at
~340m. I do not know if the distance is in any way certified (and I doubt it).
If you assume the GPS is exact (which I also do not), then extrapolating gives
1:25:11. More likely it will be somewhere between the 20.76 km from the GPS and
the actual half distance. As long as the course is at least 20810 metre, it
extrapolates to a sub 1:25 ðŸ˜‰. Not 100% sure what to do with this now. Perhaps
for a next half marathon I will have to look for a bigger race I know to be
certified. Extra advantage that there might be more people to pace off of.

I finished 17th, 9:26 behind the winner. I was also beat by one female.
Olympian [Lisa Hahner][lisahahner] showed up and took second overall in
1:16:22.

The woman in black from my little group went on to win the 14.1 km race in a
time of 55:47. <!-- bib 2227 --> Orange short and shoes was doing the half and
finished 21st in 1:25:29. <!-- bib 3376 --> I found him in Strava's Flyby and
it turns out he managed to stay somewhat close to me after I took over. At the
end of lap 2 he was 20 to 30 seconds behind. After my slight slacking, he
brought it back to about 10 seconds. I regained composure and brought it back
to 20 seconds. Then on a tiny incline around km 17 he seems to have straight up
stopped or walked.  The difference went up to 80s. Finally he lost another 20
seconds between there and the finish. I had some trouble finding white shirt,
but I think it is because the front of his singlet is red instead of white.
This would make him 15th in 1:23:04. <!-- bib 3190 -->

I waited around a bit for Johannes, but sadly I had not seen him arrive yet at
1:30:00. Eventually he ended up 51st in 1:32:25. We took some pictures and had
some water and tea. The girlfriend arrived another 8 minutes later in 1:40:51
(115 overall, 12th female). We did not stay long after the race since we still
had to check out of our hotel (and I was getting really cold after standing
around for 20 minutes).

## Future

In the near future I think I will use my current shape and have a go at
improving my 10 km and 5 km PRs. Just a matter of finding a flat race of the
right distance. Not always simple in my neck of the woods.

Beyond that I will have to see about a spring goal.

[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1945104373
[results]: https://www.davengo.com/event/result/15-teltowkanal-halbmarathon-2018/search?category=21,1%20km%20Laufen
[fall2018]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-08-08-fall-2018 %}
[brickfields]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-09-01-brickfields-parkrun %}
[jogging80]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-10-07-jogging-80 %}
[bxlcanal]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-10-20-brussels-canal-run %}
[vo2max4times1000]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1850314222
[finallongrun]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1931964381
[racepace]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1935442150
[lisahahner]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisa_Hahner
