---
layout: post
title: "20 km door Brussel"
date: 2018-05-27 12:00:00
tags: report
---

Here we are again. My third time competing in the 20 km door Brussel. In the
past I took part in the [2015][edition2015] and [2016][edition2016] editions.
After the 2016 edition I declared I would stop caring about it because it is so
stupidly crowded: up to 40,000 people sign up, starting across just six waves.
In 2017 I was abroad when it happened. This year however, I was half
considering doing it again.  Since 2016 ended in, in my opinion, failure, I
still had a score to settle. I was not sure I really cared enough though. Then
a co-worker started taunting and challenging me. He was set on breaking my PR
and becoming the best in our lab. Eventually I decided to commit and signed up,
six weeks before the race itself.

## Training

Have not actually done much specificity training for this one. Instead I will
just describe what I _have_ done the past months. Base building, largely.
Aiming to run 65 km per week, spread over six days, longer run on Sunday,
workouts if I think the body (should) feel up for it. Down weeks every fourth
week. Been doing it this way as I have noticed some trouble in the past in
getting safely past 70, so I have been giving my body time to catch up to
things.

I also feel like I should mention I have been ensuring my long run is not too
crazy in comparison to the total distance I run in a week.  Specifically, I
have not run more than 18 km in one run since 8 January 2017, when I ran 21.5.
This would not change in the build up to this race. I know I can run 20 km and
I did not believe it would add anything in particular to my training.

The 65 km per week idea started in February and went OK then. Got some tempos
in, some few 100m sprints. Halfway through March I caught a fever right before
having to go to Italy for a conference. I was forced to take several days off.
I went to the conference while still on fever reducing meds and short on sleep.
It was a bit hard on the body, but I managed to get back to running.

In April my mind was turning towards the 20 km. I did a [test race on the 8th
of April][joggingdenbosrond], seven weeks before the race. It went pretty well,
despite keeping myself under control, I managed around 4:20 pace. Of course,
that one was flatter and, as it turns out, cooler temperature than the 20 km
would be. Regardless, that sealed it for me, and I signed up shortly after. The
rest of April went fine until the final week. My right knee had been bothering
me a bit. It was not painful, just noticeable. A rusty/creaky feeling, the
movement felt not necessarily smooth. I find it hard to describe. I decided to
take some days off, see if it changed anything. After a few days, it was still
similar and I just got back into running.

For the first two weeks of May, I decided to slightly up the distance I ran: 68
km and 70 km. Peaking of sorts (hah). On top of that, the Wednesday of the
second week had a [sort of 31Ã—600m workout][12urenloop]. That one definitely
tired the body out. I got through it though and squeezed out a progression
long run on the Sunday of that second week too.

The next (and final) two weeks would be easier, with the race on the Sunday of
the second week. The distance went down a little bit (60k and 50k planned),
though I still threw in a tempo on the Thursday of the first week. The first
week ended in a trip to Amsterdam, which did add some walking and biking. The
biking tired out my hip a little bit (left side especially), I think the rental
bike must have not been too great for it and forced me in a slightly awkward
position. The week of the race was almost all recovery runs, except for
Wednesday when I squeezed in a 500m sprint for a little internet competition.

## Course Details

For a longer description, see the [2016 report][edition2016].

Some highlights:

- Decent net uphill in the first half
- Add on to that three tunnels
- More downhill in the second half
- Easiness of second half negated by a 40m climb over the course of 1 km
  starting neatly around 2.5 km from the finish

## Goals and Strategy

On a non-number level, I wanted to make sure my co-worker would not be the best
of the lab after this race. I was OK with him breaking my old PR, but I was set
on breaking it myself too and doing it better.

In actual numbers, my PR was at 1:30:40 from 2016 (2015 was 1:30:41, I paced
2016 terribly). His PR was 1:33:xx from 2016. I will admit I did not feel
terribly threatened (hubris?): I figured if he would break my old PR, it would
not be by much. He on the other hand _was_ saying his training had been better
than ever and that he felt more in shape than ever before.

At the very least I wanted to PR. Besides that I figured my body could handle a
1:27:30, which would hopefully be plenty to keep him away. I had a stretch goal
of 1:25 if I was feeling particularly good.

In the week of the race, two important things happened.

For the first point, let me sketch my co-worker's running a bit. On a yearly
basis, when the worst of winter is past, he starts training for the 20km, races
it, and then his running consistency slowly fizzles out again. As far as I have
been able to gather, he has been doing it like that for at least five years
now, possibly more. The same stuff was happening this year. He started at the
end of January, doing 9 km, 21 km, and then 43 km in the first three weeks.
After that he hovered around that weekly distance, sometimes down to 25,
sometimes up to 55. He however spreads out these kilometres over an odd choice
of runs. A selection includes: not running for seven days, then running 20 km
and 17 km over the course of three days; and running 57 km over the course of
four days, one of the runs being 30 km.

With the sketch behind us, let us get on to the actual important news. The
weekend before the race, he decided he should do _a 20 km run at 20 km race
pace_ on Friday evening followed by hunting for a 4.5 km segment of mine on
Sunday morning. Wednesday he tells me his foot hurts a bit (the foot had been
nagging him already about a month ago), even when walking.  Thursday he comes
into the office on crutches. The pain was too much to walk on and he was going
to the doctor later that day. He still had hopes for Sunday, I just hoped he
was not going to be dumb enough to run on that. Side note: I have also done
dumb stuff in my running training, most of us have probably been there. I
however did try to warn him almost every time we talked about running, so I
feel like I can be free in what I say about it now.

As for the second important thing, the weather prediction was terrible. The
entire week was not that hot and had plenty of rain and thunderstorms. The
Sunday prediction for the race, however, was around 24C at the start with not a
cloud in the sky and a high of 29C. Not my kind of temperature. The race
organisers said there would be three water curtains to help with the heat. The
news outlets all started putting articles online how to survive a day like
that. We barely ever reach 30C here, so this was a big deal. The day before the
race, the weather was about the same as the weather was predicted to be on the
day itself. I decided to do my planned recovery run, starting 30 minutes past
what would be the starting time. [It sucked][strava-saturday], I suffered, it
ruined my confidence for the race. At this point, I was going to be happy with
a PR.

The final plan was: do the first 10 km at 1h30 pace (4:30 per km), then see
what (if anything) I can do in the second half.

## Pre-race Logistics

### Friday

To be more kind to my body, I decided to work from home on Friday. I tried to
make sure I drank more water than usual to stay extra hydrated (is that even a
thing?). There was no run planned this day.

### Saturday

I usually need quite some sleep (9 hours+) and am sadly also not very good at
sleeping. Despite my attempts to fall asleep, I only got about 6-7 hours in. I
hoped I could make it up the next night.

As mentioned in the previous section, the weather on Saturday was pretty much
the same as what was predicted for Sunday. I ran at 10:30 (30 minutes past the
race's start time) to get an idea of what to expect. As above: [it
sucked][strava-saturday], I suffered, it ruined my confidence for the race.

The rest of the day was not kind to me either. Every time I got up out of the
couch, I had a head rush and felt dizzy. I was still drinking quite a bit of
water, but my body was not happy. I wondered if I got dehydrated after all. I
was not sure what else I could do besides all the water drinking I was doing. I
was not sure it was dehydration at all.

I finished the day with my usual pre-race dinner of spaghetti bolognese.

I had trouble falling asleep.

### Sunday

I woke up at 7:00 (3 hours till race start), only getting in about 7 hours of
sleep again. I decided to help wake me up by blasting up beat classic Belgian songs.
It helped and they would stay on till I left around 8:30.

I had two and a halve plates of the leftovers which was, in retrospect, maybe
just a bit too much for a race. A burp during the race briefly brought up a
tiny bit of it to the back of my throat.

Besides that it was a matter of drinking enough water and using the toilet
often enough. We left at 8:30 to catch the metro to be at the race area around
9:15. (The girlfriend was not racing, but was kind enough to come along and
carry some water for after the race and a change of clothes)

There was a brief distraction by a goose family ending up in the crowd. The
police helped the troublemakers on their way though.

TODO PICTURE

I made sure my watch was on the data screens I wanted Time-Distance-HR and Avg
Pace-Lap Pace-HR.  The Forerunner 225 only has two screens with up to the three
fields each. After some last small sips of water, I went into my wave's corral
around 9:30, doing a short warm-up jog in the area. Some clouds were showing,
but afterwards I still went to hide under one of the trees to ensure I kept
cool enough.

Soon, the [Bolero by Maurice Ravel][bolero] started playing. The 20 km door
Brussel always uses this ~15 minutes long classical song as the final build up
to the start. I kept my head focused on the race and did some knee lifts and
similar things to keep the body moving. When the Bolero ends, the Belgian
anthem starts playing, not many races in Belgium do this. I used it to get a
bit more hyped and everyone's clapping helped get me further in the right
mindset. By the end of it, I noticed a few rain drops were falling from the
sky, which gave me back some of the confidence I had lost in the warmth the day
before. The few lost drops would stop again immediately, but it was what I
needed to fully focus on not worrying. The gun went off and everyone started
slowly walking or jogging to the start line, which is a bit of a bottleneck.

## Race

As is tradition in most any race of mine, I started out too fast. In my
defence, it is a bit tricky to get right. The first km is downwards for a
couple 100 metre before going upwards about to the same elevation it started
out at. Around the end of the second kilometre, you pass in front of the royal
palace, running over terrible terrible cobbles. At this point in time I still
feel fresh so the extra concentration for it is easily managed.

As we pass the first water stand, things are a bit of a clusterfuck. I somewhat
easily can grab one, but someone in front of me fails to.  I start getting his
attention to share mine, but he asks someone else before he notices me.
Someone else comes from behind me and asks if I he can use what I have left.  I
happily oblige and wish him good luck. I did not catch his bib so I do not know
whether that worked out. I pass the 3k point on my watch ahead of my time
schedule.

> First three kilometre in 4:09, 4:19, and 4:28.

I notice someone with a rather weird running style in front of me. His legs
swing somewhat sideways and it all looks rather laboured. I briefly ponder
about it, but figure if it works for him, I am not one to judge. The race is
softly climbing up a boulevard at this point, though everything is made more
difficult by three tunnels spread throughout it. The tunnels give a brief
reprieve when you enter them, but coming back out of them is a climb on top of
the climbing. Not my favourite moment of the race, not the worst either though.
Just past the second tunnel I notice the guy with the odd running style again.
As I once again ponder his efficiency, he veers to the left side of the road
and starts walking. So far for that question.

We reach the end of the boulevard around the 6 km point and turn into
Terkamerenbos. I notice my GPS distance and the race signage already disagree
on the distance. I blamed it on the tunnels and decided I would ignoring the
"average pace" field of my watch in favour of doing some calculations using my
total time and the race signage. I do not have that information here, so the
GPS laps are all that are mentioned here. Either way, I come still a bit too
quickly through 6 km as well.

> Kilometres four, five, and six: 4:45, 4:41, 4:24.

This forest-y area we are now in has some more shade and I try to stick to it
where possible.  The second water bottle stand is still clusterfucky, but
slightly better than the last one. I begin to notice I am not good at drinking
from a bottle while running, managing only the tiniest of sips, stressing my
patience. Most of the water ends up on my head instead. Maybe a bit of waste as
I see the first of the water curtains coming up around 7.5 km into the race.
The setup is some device lying on the ground that is spraying upwards, creating
a sort of fan of water. I take my hat off as we run past it in hopes of getting
that extra wet too. The effects of it did not feel as significant as I hoped.
Each individual water spray is rather thin. At the next provision stand only
the sports drink by one of the sponsors is served. I grab one, take two sips of
it and decide I do not trust it enough to down everything. I had not tested how
my stomach handles it after all. A wise choice: shortly after the two sips my
stomach felt rather heavy, something that would last for a km or two.

Next we make a sharp right turn to get back out of the forest. During the turn,
someone on the inside suddenly stops turning, running straight into my path,
getting me out of my stride. I cast an angry glance and see him start walking.
I do not understand how he thought that was the best course of action. If I
recall he could have more easily stepped in between the sparse bushes on the
inside of the turn. Shortly thereafter, I pass the official 10 km mark. I am
over a minute ahead of what I had planned. Shortly _there_ after, my watch
tells me we hit 10.

> Official 10 km split: 43:51 (i.e., 4:23/km or on pace for 1:27:42).

> Kilometres seven through ten: 4:51, 4:19, 4:22, and 4:26.

I thought that from here on out it would be smooth sailing on a slight descent
for a while.  I had misremembered. The road remains flat-ish and even throws in
another climb at 11 km. It is not that bad in se, but my body started feeling
the effort and running ahead of what I thought was good for me. Luckily after
that last bump, the descending does finally start. I still feel the warmth and
that fact that I went out a bit too fast though and am not speeding up the way
I had hoped I would. I zoned out more from here on out too, not noticing or
remembering as much from my surroundings as I did before. 

As I spot the second water curtain on the other side of the road (~12 km?), I
veer towards it (while ensuring I do not run in front of other runners). I
decide to just run straight over the device, maximising the amount of water to
hit me. I exit completely drenched, but feeling a bit refreshed. In retrospect
I think it was worth it in this weather.

I notice someone who, from the side, looks like someone I might know. He does
not notice me. For a while I hesitate whether to say hi, but eventually I pass
him without having said a word. Turns out it was not that person, so social
crisis averted.

In my zoning out, I do notice the shirt of someone in front of me. It says
"follow me till the last mile". I think he may have been a pacer before.  Over
the next kilometres, I will see him often as we run about the same pace.

> Kilometres eleven through fifteen: 4:35, 4:24, 4:22, 4:28, and 4:26.

The descending is behind us now and I am feeling the effort more and more. It
is starting to show in my splits as I have trouble holding the 4:30 pace I had
planned for the _first_ half. I get a little worried about completely blowing
up. I use the final water curtain in the same manner as the second, running
straight over it. Quite some water gets in my shoes now, which feels less nice.
The rest of my body is very happy with the refreshment though.

It is needed too, because the worst is yet to come. The Tervurenlaan climb is
coming up, hated and feared by most people doing this race. In 2015 I had quite
some in the tank still and felt quite alright on it. In 2016 I was already
falling apart and the climb just completely ruined me. I feared today would not
be a happy memory.

We turn onto the Tervurenlaan and... things feel OK. It is going upwards, but
not that bad at all.  My relief is short-lived. The actual climb was still to
come. Once that happens, I start slowing down more, adjusting my pace to keep
my heart rate under 180. I see "follow me till the last mile" guy slowly
getting away, but do not bother adjusting my pace to his. By the time we reach
the top, I am ready for this race to end.

> Kilometres sixteen through eighteen: 4:32, 4:35, and 5:07.

I feel that my body has not much left to give and focus on tailing a woman who
passes by for some pacing. I do know that PRing should be easy now. In the
distance I see the monument marking the finish line. I get caught up in the
moment and make a beginner's mistake: I start my end "sprint". There is however
another 1.5 km to go. I realise this as we reach a roundabout that I know to be
about 1 km from the line. I briefly slow down again, but then think "fuck it".
If there is anything at all left in the tank, then we are throwing it all out
now. I overtake people, an act that is going much more smoothly than in
previous editions. The crowd of remaining runners is much less dense than I am
used to. One of the people I pass is "follow me till the last mile" guy, which
gives me some satisfaction. It took me longer than the last mile, but I
listened to his shirt in the end.

Coming into the park in which the finish line is located, there are some
cobbles. While they are, in theory, much easier to run on than the one in front
of the royal palace early on in the race, they give me more difficulty. My
tired body has trouble quickly getting itself through that section.

Finally the finish line itself is in sight. I use whatever else I have left and
am glad to have made it in one piece. After crossing, I stumble through to get
some water, a banana, and my medal.  The girlfriend finds me and we walk on to
get away from the crowd and to find some shade under the trees. I drop down and
take over 30 minutes before I feel like moving again to head home.

- first half in 43:51, second half in 44:08
- bib 1592 was next to me at start and ~28 minutes in. 15 seconds behind me
  somewhere in tervuren climb, think she caught up to me there, that I was
  behind her briefly, then left her behind. Could be wrong. Check pictures of
  women finishing around me.

## Results



## Future

[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1599138377
[edition2015]: {{site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2015-05-31-20km-door-brussel %}
[edition2016]: {{site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-05-29-20km-door-brussel %}
[12urenloop]: {{site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-05-09-12-urenloop %}
[joggingdenbosrond]: {{site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-04-08-jogging-den-bos-rond %}
[strava-saturday]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1596485020
[bolero]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r30D3SW4OVw
