---
layout: post
title: "12-urenloop"
date: 2018-05-09 22:00:00
tags:
- report
---

Every year, my university holds a 12 hour relay. Teams compete against one
another to run the most laps in 12 hours, switching runners every lap. [Last
year][12uren2017] I took part a bit haphazardly, running 13 laps way harder
than I had wanted to.

This year, I felt like taking part with a larger contribution and not letting
myself get caught up as much as last year, lasting longer, running more.

## Training

Since the beginning of February, I have been aiming to run 65 km per week
consistently, with a down week every fourth week.  This has largely worked out,
though I had to make some adjustments for sore throats and a fever in March.
Two weeks before this race, I also decided to take some days off because my
right knee had been bothering me.  No pain or anything, just... noticeable at
times. Taking the days off did not necessarily change much to that feeling so I
went back to running and just keeping an eye on it. I tried to do tempos, but
must admit I have not been as vigilant in ensuring I do those as maybe I should
have. Especially if something feels a bit odd, I'll just abandon trying the
harder work in view of keeping it safe.

The goal for this spring is the 20 km door Brussels at the end of May. While it
has been "the goal", I must admit I am not tackling the problem as religiously
as I might have in the past. I am just trying to ensure I can run often and in
a healthy manner. If I can squeeze in some work that benefits such a race:
great. Otherwise, no harm done. So it is "the spring goal", but it is a soft
goal indeed.

## Course Details

The start was still the same as last year, turning into a very brief downhill
on packed earth with roots sticking out that you half jump between. This rings
especially true in the evening, when it gets dark and harder to actually see
the roots. Next came a small change compared to last year. Rather than run the
first half on stone slabs, the course was kept just to the left of them: in the
grass. This made for slightly more difficult running. After this bit,
everything was the same as the year before.  You briefly enter the track to run
on its short side, then exit again with a sharp double turn, then run on stone
to the area where you started. All in all a lap is around 550-600 metre.

## Goals and Strategy

I had no goals going into this besides ensuring I could run for longer than
last year, while not damaging myself as much in the process.  Both of these are
met by one simple thing: running a bit slower. Last year I let myself get
dragged into sprinting a bit too often, especially since I figured I would only
be spending an hour at the race. This year I wanted to stay several hours, so I
could not let that happen.

## Race

I had to teach in the afternoon, so had to wait till after that before I could
join my team. I joined them around 16:00, running my first lap shortly
thereafter.

TODO: Continue with GoldenCheetah data besides me.

## Results

Most of my 31 laps are in [one activity][strava1]. At some point I stopped and
saved that one because my battery was running low. My final two laps thus have
their separate activities: [one][strava2] and [two][strava3].

Official results (without addition of some entertainment laps) are as follows

1. Mesacosa 326
2. Solvay 314
3. GK 311
4. Biotecho 304
5. PK 300
6. **WK 268**
7. VSKM 260
8. VRG 258
9. KEPS 247
10. PPK 245
11. Pers 235
12. LWK 154

## Future

Survive till the 20 km door Brussels which falls 18 days after this one. This
week was my last high week, from next week on I will be taking it a bit easier
and taper towards the 20 km. Still not sure what my goal should be for that one.

After that, I will likely focus back on just the base building, specifically on
increasing my weekly distance some.  Though before I do that, I will have to
read up a bit on the usefulness of running more than one hour in one go. That
might be the main limiting factor for me still. So maybe I need to do some more
speedwork-related things in hopes of getting my base speed up.

[12uren2017]: {{site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-05-14-12-urenloop-and-plantentuinjogging %}
[strava1]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1560938852
[strava2]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1560938567
[strava3]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1560938625
