---
layout: post
title: "Victoria Dock Parkrun #30"
date: 2018-11-17 18:00:00
tags:
- report
- podium
---

I wanted to cash in on my recent [halfmarathon][teltow] shape. Any 5 or 10k was
going to be OK for me, I figured I should be able to get a PR in either
distance. I just so happened to have a weekend trip to London planned, so
figured I would do a parkrun there.  In the past I have done the Beckton
parkrun, but I recalled a lot of it being on uneven grass. Instead, I decided
on the Victoria Dock parkrun. It is in the same general area, but has a
stronger crowd show up and, most of all, has no grassy patches.

## Course Details

## Training

No need to repeat what I said in my [halfmarathon report][teltow], just check
there really. Since then I have had two weeks of transitioning/recovering, with
some schedule reshuffling to give a sort of taper for this race.

## Goals and Strategy

My PR was [18:01 from December 2015][chestercounty]. This would be the first
time I would take a real shot at breaking it on a flat course since then. I had
hoped to have a go at it back in Dublin in September, but [no competition
showed up and I just ran it as a Threshold workout of sorts][brickfields]. The
goal was simple: break the PR. Aim for 17:55, see what happens. Pacing wise,
that is 3:35 per kilometre.

## Getting There



## Race

The start is rather wide, so I had no trouble starting on the front line. Going
by results from previous weeks, a top five finish should be manageable, so I
was not going to start any further back than the first row anyway. As we start,
I immediately am in third position together with a taller guy.  Ahead of us are
a shorter guy and a guy in tights. I have no clue where to go, I do not recall
seeing any markings, but it seems at least one of the two guys in front of us
does. I just follow them at a few metre.

After 500 or so metre, I find it going a tad too fast for me and I let the tall
guy go. Soon, a guy in a JP Morgan shirt passes me. I decide to follow him to
keep the pace going. Not long after that, an Asian guy in an orange singlet
also gets ahead of me in this little group of ours.

> GPS Lap 1 in 3:31.

Orange singlet takes the lead in our group, JPM shirt is in second position,
and I am in third. We pass the guy in tights who took the lead at the start, he
is fading hard. About 1.5 km into the race, we reach the end of this side of
the dock. Right before reaching the π turn, I sneak into second place. Looking
back at it, I am not really sure why, but I think I might have wanted to play
it somewhat safe: if I had trouble restarting, at least there was someone else
to still run with. Turning goes al right, though I feel the area right below my
left butt cheek a little bit.

Our group sticks together and on the way back to the start/finish area, we
cross the girlfriend. She goes through the trouble of stopping just to take my
picture. How nice of her 😍

> GPS Lap 2 in 3:33.

On the way back, we run a bit closer to the water than on the way out. No
issues there, except that there are four stairs of 3 long steps each. None of
us feels like circling around them, so we just jump down each set, avoiding
weird steps. I feel like I do this slightly less efficient than the others.
JPM shirt takes the opportunity to make a move and takes first spot of our
group by the end of the last stairs. Near the start/finish area, he pushes
things further and creates a bit of a gap. Neither orange singlet or I move to
close it, but I do lose a few metre on orange singlet. I gather some willpower
and push to stay on his tail.

> GPS Lap 3 in 3:38.

We move away again from the start/finish area, but now on the other side of the
water. I can see JPM shirt 10-20 metre ahead of my duo-group, with taller guy
again that distance ahead of him, and shorter guy yet again that distance in
front of tall guy. Halfway on this out stretch, I feel like we are going a bit
too slow. I push past orange singlet and take over leading. We reach the
turnaround point at about 3.7 km. I take it a bit too wide to my liking, but
immediately push the pace again. I feel like I have lost orange singlet, so
place four is secure. JPM shirt up ahead looks like too big of a gap to bridge
though. Guess I will just need to focus on myself now.

> GPS Lap 4 in 3:40.

I manage alright in keeping the pace up. Looking at the GPS after the race
tells me I noticeably sped up after the second turnaround point.  As I reach
the start/finish area, I notice the gap on JPM is only fiveish metre any more.
I figure this is the last 100 metre or so and decide to just go balls to the
wall and see if I can pass him. This works out right around passing the start
line, but then I notice we have a little bit more to go than I thought. I did
not realise at the time how much exactly (200ish metre), just that I did not
see how we were going to reach the finish line exactly. Gulp.

I hope I did not get myself to blow up with my little manoeuvre and try to make
out what is still in store. A hidden π turn! I make the turn and internally
yell at the legs to kick me back into speed. At least I can see the finish now:
100ish metre of pain of pain to go. I do not know how close JPM is behind me.
Fifty metre further, I manage to glance into the windows of a building on the
side.  I do not see him close behind me and know my third spot is safe. I have
lost track of my time by this point, but am assuming that should work out.

A brief moment of confusion as I pass the line. I had followed the first and
second guy on a rightish turn, while we should have gone straight ahead for the
finish chute. After realising my race is done, I press my stop button and go
have my time registered. Both guys in front of me and the guy behind me were
also confused with the finish, so it is all good.

## Results

The [results] peg me at 17:16. [Strava] says 17:19 due to my delayed stopping
at the end.

## Future


[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/1969117011
[results]: https://www.parkrun.org.uk/victoriadock/results/weeklyresults/?runSeqNumber=30
[teltow]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-11-04-teltowkanal-halbmarathon %}
[brickfields]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-09-01-brickfields-parkrun %}
[chestercounty]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2015-12-12-chester-county-winter-series %}
