---
layout: post
title: "20 km door Brussel"
date: 2019-05-19 12:00:00
tags:
- report
---

The [Antwerp 10 Miles][antwerp10miles] was my main spring goal. However, I also
signed up for the 20 km door Brussel again. Last year I broke into the top
1000, running 1:27:59 on a hot sunny day. I figured if the weather turned out
better this year, I could easily PR. Not only am I in better shape, but hot
weather also really affects me. As the date drew nearer, the weather seemed to
be almost as good as it can get for this time of year. Guess I would be taking
it slightly more seriously.

## Training

Most of my spring training is detailed in my previous two race reports: first
[Lier][lier], then [Antwerp][antwerp10miles]. In this section I will just
describe the past three weeks since that Antwerp 10 Miles race.

Week one was a recovery week, totalling 55 km. Week two I went back to higher
volume (85 km), but kept intensity at regular running (GA/Recovery). Originally
the Wednesday of week two had the 12 hour relay race of my university planned,
something I took part in the past two years. [Two years ago][12uren2017] I
raced every lap really hard and was sore for ages. [Last year][12uren2018] I
managed to take things a little easier, but also hung around for 6 hours. This
year I had committed to being around the full 12 hours. Due to bad weather
however, they ended up moving the race back a week. Now it fell in the week of
this 20 km race.

I had planned on somewhat training through the 20 km, but not really expected
to run that much just a few days before. Now I did not have much of a choice. I
resolved to run the laps at a really easy pace. Did not quite work out. I ended
up running them around 4:10 pace, faster than my regular running pace, it might
be about my hypothetical marathon pace. I stayed around all day, running 36
laps. I did not run the final hour as I started feeling a weird twitch around
my right ankle. I was willing to sacrifice freshness, but I was not going to
get injured for this. After that Wednesday, I ran 6, 10, and 6 again in the
days before the 20 km race. My legs felt better day after day, but still not
great.

## Goals and Strategy

At first I just wanted to PR, then I figured if the weather was alright, 1:25
should be easily attainable. There is no 1:25 pacer though, but there is a 1:20
one.  Based on my Antwerp time, I have a 1:16 low 20 km in my legs. Antwerp is,
however, considerably flatter. It crossed my mind to just follow the 1:20
pacer.  The idea was in my head and it was there to stay. I figured I was OK
with blowing up anyway, my spring goal had already passed three weeks earlier.
After a lot of internal debate and bouncing the idea off others, I settled on
it. Follow the 1:20 pacer and see what happens.

## Course Details

Just check the previous race reports.

<!-- TODO Link those old ones -->

## Pre Race

Nothing really special in the days leading up to it. Just ensured I had a calm
Saturday.

I based my Sunday morning planning on notes from last year. Woke up at 7:00
with race start planned for 10:00.  Had 100g muesli and a cup and a half of
black tea as quickly as I could.  Listened to upbeat 90s music to help wake up.
Tried to use the toilet often enough. Left around 8:30 to head to
Cinquantenaire. It was lightly raining and would do so till the start. Once
there (around 9:15) I passed by the tent of Brussels studentsport. I had signed
up through university and still had to pick up my bib there. Nice extras: I
could easily drop my bag there and afterwards there would be more fruit,
sportdrink, water, ... By 9:30 I went for a little jog around the park to
arrive at my wave. Had a peak at the lines for the toilet, but decided I did
not feel like waiting in line.

Once in the wave, I kept walking around some and doing some stretches to keep
somewhat warm. By 9:50 I squeezed into the crowd, few rows down from the front
line. My coworker (aiming for a sub 1:30) found me and we chatted briefly. I
spotted a 1:20 pacer, but he went into the "elite" corral in front of us. The
other 1:20 pacers joined him there. I was getting worried for a repeat of the
Antwerp 10 Miles pacer mishap. Luckily before starting the race, they removed
the barrier between wave 1 and the elite wave, so we could join up behind them.
I got near one of the pacers and decided he was going to be the one to follow.
In total I spotted four of them. One on the other side of the corral I ignored.
One I was standing right behind. The other two were several rows up ahead.

To kill time while we waited for the start signal, I chatted for a bit with an
older man with glasses who was also planning on following the pacer.

## Race


{% include racesplit.html content='
Official split at 15.1 km, the tunnel exit: 57:04 and 197th position. This
would make my pace in the tunnel 3:51 average. I expected it to be faster,
but they do say you cannot make up uphill pace in the downhill. Projected
finish time: 60:49.
' %}

## Results


## Future


[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/2379454884
[results]: http://www.chronorace.be/Classements/classement.aspx?eventId=1187184795226934&IdClassement=19130&mode=large
[tinman]: http://www.runfastcoach.com/calc2/index.php
[antwerp10miles]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2019-04-28-antwerp-10-miles %}
[lier]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2019-03-30-natuurloopcriterium-lier %}
[12uren2017]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-05-14-12-urenloop-and-plantentuinjogging %}
[12uren2018]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-05-09-12-urenloop %}
