---
layout: post
title: "Natuurloopcriterium Lier 10.4 km"
date: 2019-03-30 18:00:00
tags:
- report
---

I felt like updating my 10 km PR. The usual equivalence tables said it was my
softest time, meaning it should be an easy one to improve. I decided on
running one I ran back in November 2016: the [Natuurloopcriterium
Lier][lier2016]. This criterium holds a 10 km race (and some others) five times
in the winter months. More importantly: it is flat.

## Course Details

It is a flat course along the canals in the village of Lier. It is almost
entirely paved, besides some short grass patches, and a short part with weird
uneven rocks with gaps in-between them. There is no shade at the time of day of
the race, which was planned to start at 13:50. Not too many tight turns.
Pretty great really. Oh and the organisers decided to increase the length of
the course compared to last time I ran it. They were now calling it a *10.4 km
course*. Bleb ðŸ˜©

## Training

### Six Day Cycles

I had wanted to play around with a different length cycle than the usual seven
day cycle. The idea is to ensure having two recovery days in-between each
workout. In essence I was already having enough recovery days in the past, by
often planning just two workouts (i.e., a workout plus a long run) in my seven
day week. The idea was to use a nine or ten day cycle in order to have more
workouts, but still have two days of recovery (a rest day or an easy run)
in-between each run. In my mind, however, you have just one long run per *x*
day cycle, at the end of the cycle. I was not really in the mood to have fewer
long runs (one every seven days versus one every nine or ten days). Breaking
the entire idea down to three day blocks (recovery, recovery, workout), I
eventually decided to give six day cycles a try: recovery, recovery, workout,
recovery, recovery, long run. Not sure I have heard of people doing this yet,
but as long as I run enough with enough easy and enough hard, I figured I could
not do much wrong.

### The Plan

I went through eight six day cycles in the run up to the race. Right before the
first one, I also had a seven day one that I count as part of the decision to
run this race.  Thus, you could see it as nine cycles. By default, every cycle
had a long run on its last day.  The other workout was placed on the third day
of each cycle. Easy-easy-workout-easy-easy-long.  I will use Jack Daniels
terminology to say what the workout entailed.

The first three cycles had **R**eptition workouts: repeats of 200 or 400 metre
with equidistant rest. Pace is from JD tables, but might be around 1 km race
pace or faster? Not sure as I do not race those distances. The first two went
alright, I think I kinda like this short fast work. Reassuring since I have
been having half a mind of doing a training cycle focused on 1500 metre to 3000
metre.  Speaking of which, curious about the state my body was in, I replaced
the R workout of the third cycle with a mile time trial. Result: few seconds
slower than what I had in November, but I might just have been more tired now.
Did not taper for either.

For the next five cycles I wanted to alternate **T**hreshold (about 20-30
minutes around 1 hour race pace) and **I**ntervals (reps of 3-5 minutes at 3-5
km race pace, rest about half to 90% of the time). In other words T, I, T, I,
T. The first and second cycle felt alright. In the third one (a lower volume
cycle), my body felt too tired and I ended up dropping the T. Then for
scheduling I switched around the next two cycles.  Finally, I turned that last
I workout into a parkrun race. So the workouts of the five cycles ended up as
T, I, none, T, I-as-race.

Mini race report in race report: I ran 4-5 km to get to the parkrun start,
considered that my warmup.  From the start I first tried to keep up with the
first two guys. A few 100 metre in, when checking the pace, I noticed I had
forgotten to press start on the watch. Oops.  Little bit further, having
pressed start, I checked again, and noticed that the pace was going to be way
too much to hold for 5 km. Especially since we started up a hill.  I started
slowing, leaving three guys ahead of me. Soon after, another guy passed me
pushing me down to fifth position. One of the original three was also fading
though, probably having made the same mistake as I did. I passed him soon
after. It stayed like this for a bit as I was trying to find a pace that was
just easy enough to carry me to the end. The course consists of two loops and
the second time up the main hill of the course, the guy I had overtaken
earlier, went past me again. He quickly made a decent sized gap. I tried to
close it on the downhill, where I was faster, but did not manage. Eventually I
settled to just run home fifth spot. The final few 100 metre, a friend came
sprinting alongside me, which made me briefly go faster again. All in all it
went OK, time was 18:07. If I had known I would have been close to dipping
under 18 again (remember, forgot to start the watch), I probably would have
pushed a bit more the last km or so. Oh well.

The ninth cycle was a taper cycle. Reduced volume and a race pace test on
Tuesday with the race coming up on Saturday. Throughout this taper, my legs
felt tired. I am inclined to blame it on two non-running related factors.
First, TAing had restarted, adding 12 hours per week of time on feet. Second,
my sleep had been bad. Bad sleep is a reoccurring problem in my life, but this
time around I was not even able to sleep in from time to time to "reset" the
counter. Body was not letting me. Even the day before the race, a short
recovery with some strides, my legs felt like they had nothing to give. The
strides felt horrible.

## Goals and Strategy

The main goal was to PR. I had run 39 low back in October on a hilly and muddy
course, that was likely short. I figured it evened out though. Before that, I
would have to go back to that previous edition of this race back in 2016 and its
39:45.

More specifically, I looked at some other times I had run to decide on the pace
I wanted. I went for my mile time trial. Based on that, I would have to run
a 37:30 or faster in this 10 km. A 3:45 pace was going to be the goal.

## Race


## Results


## Future


[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/
[results]: https://www.example.com
[lier2016]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-11-26-natuurloopcriterium-lier %}
