---
layout: post
title: "Thoughts on a 10 day cycle"
date: 2019-01-26 18:00:00
tags:
- training
---

A lot of training plans use seven day cycles. It is easier to plan around given
just about everyone has a consistent seven days to work with.  It is, however,
trickier for recovery. Most plans cram three workouts in those seven days. If
you want recovery days of easier running in-between those three, then you might
try something like: r-r-w-r-w-r-w for a week. For two of the workouts, you will
have but one day of recovery until the next workout. Depending on your body,
that can be not ideal.

Note that for the purpose of this post, I consider the long run to be a
workout. Recovery may be an easy run or no running at all.

With that in mind, many have suggested moving away from seven day cycles and
replacing them with nine or ten day cycles.  In this manner you can place two
recovery days between each workout. A disadvantage is that you lose the
consistency in your life.  No more Tuesday track workout, Sunday long run, ...
or whichever ones you are used to. Important days are bound to shift place week
to week. Regardless, I was interested in the idea of forcing enough recovery
days. I thought some more about it and decided to jot down my ideas.

# Repetition

The fewer crazy deviations a plan makes, the easier it is to schedule it in
every week. For that, you want things to repeat. Just using an *x* day cycle
as is, means it will take *[LCM][lcm](x, 7) / x* cycles (or *LCM(x, 7) / 7*
weeks) before your cycle and the regular week sync up again. Seven is a prime
number, so in essence this means it will always take seven cycles (or *x*
weeks) before your cycle starts on the same day of the week again.

In other words, planning a nine or ten day cycle may be a real pain. Every week
things will be shifting around and you will not see any repetition till over
two months later. A solution I have heard about to get around this and still
have the advantage of longer recovery periods, is to alternate a ten and an
eleven day cycle. This way you "start over" every three weeks. This alone might
already make it much more feasible for many people.

# Building Blocks

Playing around with scheduling and making some mock plans, I realised
something. Nine days, ten days, eleven days, no matter what I was always
breaking it up into smaller parts, the building blocks of the cycles. One such
building block would be three (or four) days long and consist of recovery,
recovery, workout (or r-r-r-w for four days). I would then use those building
blocks to create the actual cycle: put three of three days in a row and you get
a nine day cycle.

I almost ended up settling on using _just_ three day blocks and viewing those
as a cycle. With three day "cycles", you reset every three weeks, just like
with a ten-eleven alternating cycle. Unlike the ten-eleven day cycle, you do
not have several awkward four day blocks. You keep it simple: recovery,
recovery, workout. It does remove some of the repetition you may be used to
from cycle to cycle.  One cycle might have a track workout, the next a long
run, ... The long run especially is something I like to schedule "often
enough", so I figured I would still want that in every "cycle" I ended up with.

# What I Ended Up With

So in the end I settled on a six day cycle that I am giving a go this spring
season. I wanted to try two days of recovery between harder efforts, but no more than that.
I wanted a long run in every cycle.


[lcm]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Least_common_multiple
