---
layout: post
title: "Jaarmarktjogging Jette"
date: 2019-08-25 12:00:00
tags:
- report
- podium
---

This small race is just around the corner from where I live, so I always feel a
certain obligation to show up in order to support the local running community.
I first found out about the race's existence after their second edition in 2016
and subsequently took part in the [2017 edition][2017edition]. Last year I felt
tired and decided I would show up if I woke up in time. I did not wake up in
time. This year I approached it with a similar mindset.

I had completely forgotten about the race, then was reminded on Thursday that
it was happening. Put it as a "maybe I will pass by if I wake up early enough".
I ended up waking up by 8:30ish, with the start placed at 10:00. My mind
changed to "Maybe I will take part if I get ready quickly enough". Eventually
got out the door by 9:20, figured I might as well take part then.

## Training

I have been in base building mode. I am hoping to slowly and safely get my
weekly distance up a bit more to a steady 100 km. I have done 85 km several
times by now. I had planned in a 90 km week in the month before, but failed to
get there twice due to a busy travelling schedule making things trickier. The
week before the race I finally got there. The week of the race I wanted to do
so again, which was no issue as I had not yet realised the race was happening.
When I found out, I was set on the 90 km, but also inclined to try and run the
race. In other words, I trained through the race.

Workouts in the past months have been far and few in-between. A week after the
[20 km door Brussel][20kbxl], I did a 2000 metre time trial for Mooseleague, an
online competition. That got me injured as my right achilles started acting up.
A lot of scrapping of workouts happened since then, though I tried to keep the
distance going still. Depending on the workout or the steepness of a climb, the
achilles might start complaining again, so I try my best to keep it happy. I
did do three more time trials of different length for Mooseleague and last week
tried to reintroduce workouts too. An 8×200 metre R last week was a bit too
hard on the achilles, though I think part of the blame lies with still being
tired from a transatlantic flight on Sunday-Monday. A 2×10 min T workout in the
week of the race did not do any damage. (FWIW, neither did this race, as I
write this two days later)

## Race Day

As mentioned, woke up around 8:30. Did the usual preparations. Had muesli with
soy milk. Eventually out the door by 9:20. Warmup felt like absolute dogshit.
Did not feel like I had any energy in my legs, my body. Tried to get myself
pepped up by telling myself I often feel like this before a race that goes at
least alright.

## Race

Entered the waiting pack from the front to ensure I could start on the first
row. I was third in the 4 km two years ago and, even if feeling shit, am
definitely in better shape now. Figured I would check out the pace of the front
few and decide how that felt from there.

From the gun I almost immediately am in third position. I also quickly notice
the guys in front of me seemed to be going a bit too hot for me. I let them go.
At 200m I get overtaken by two guys.  I immediately pass by one who starts
slowing down after passing me, but the other one (orange shirt) is going hard
and closing the minor gap on the front two. I stick to my own pace. Another
guy, this one in short tights, passes me, also going definitely too fast for
me. I am now in fifth position across both races. I have no clue who is running
which race, so I just assume it's all 4 km people.

I see short tights overtake orange shirt as orange shirt clearly overestimated
his abilities, he is struggling.  I catch up to him after crossing the road at
the 0.5 km mark and ensure I pass him before the path narrows a little again
100 meter further. In the distance I see short tights closing on the other two
guys. Fourth position for me now.

Just past 1 km the climbing really starts in earnest. I know how long it lasts
and try to dose my "power through it" feeling. I hear breathing behind me still
till around 1.4 km when the climbing ends. I bomb down the hill and see the
three in front of me somewhat strung out as they turn left onto a messy grass
patch.

At 1.7 km I turn left myself, unaware of whether there is still someone close
behind me. I try my best to really keep my head down and look at the grass. The
ground is uneven and has holes in it; I do not want to twist my ankle while
going fast. The grass part is about 300 metre long and I get through in one
piece. Still fourth. I also managed a glance back during the turn and think I
might be 10 metre clear.

I go down an easier downwards path until a sharp turn onto the overgrown
cobbles at 2.2 km into the race. I use the turn for another quick glance, still
relatively safe. I had passed by here on my warmup to get a feel of where to
run and I think it helps. I avoid the grass on the side as it is also not that
great. I just stick to the line in the cobbles that looks most alright. About
300 metre further I turn left off the cobbles and know from here on out the
terrain will not try to kill me at least.

I try to keep the tempo honest, but am basically time trialing with a chaser I
cannot see. Then I see short tights ahead of me, he got dropped by the other
two and I seem to be slowly closing in on him. I do not adjust my speed, I do
not necessarily care about gaining a spot, and if the trend continues I will
catch up to him before the end anyway.

I catch up to short tights as we go into some sharp turns with 700-800 metre to
go, he is definitely not going very fast any more.  I am behind him for two
sharp turns and pass him on a short straight stretch after, before heading into
the next sharp turn. Glancing back shows me I already gapped him by 5-10 metre
over that 100 metre stretch. It also shows me his bib: he is running the 8 km
and thus irrelevant for me. Few more metre behind him I see another guy, but I
do not see his bib. Definitely enough to keep the gap till the line at least.
Third position now.

At 500 metre from the line, the 4 and the 8 km split up. In the distance I see
both the lead bike and _one_ guy. Guess one of the guys was doing the 4 km, the
other the 8 km. I do not spot the guy doing the 4 km though. Second position
now.

I keep the pace under control as I approach the line, I feel pretty safe I will
not get overtaken. I cross the line and get a congratulations "hug" from the
winner. He looks like he might actually be in a club and used to doing that
after races.


## Results

O Top Services or something.

[2017edition]: stuff
[20kbxl]: stufftoo
