---
layout: post
title: "Broken Ankle Chronicles: Phase 1"
date: 2020-09-17 18:00:00
tags:
- injury
- broken ankle
---

On Sunday 6 September 2020 I broke my left ankle. I tried to somewhat keep
track of the recovery process to maybe help someone in a similar predicament
frame the injury and know what to expect. I was first going to dump one big
post, but decided to split it up instead to show more of a timeline. I will
describe significant events as days since the accident. Day 0 is 6 September,
day 1 is 7 September, and so on.

This post describes days 2 through 11.

## Day (1), 2, and 3: The Early Bliss

These first few days are actually surprisingly alright, as long as I do not
make any sudden movements. I can keep the amount of painkillers to a minimum
and am just very tired for most of the day. Lots of napping.

I am evidently not very used to the crutches yet. In the night from day 2 to
day 3, I wake up and need to go to the bathroom. I lose balance almost
immediately after getting out of bed and start falling backwards. Instinctively
I place down my bad foot and am punished for the action. Very painful! I
immediately push myself off again with the good foot to try and catapult myself
in bed, taking the weight off the good foot. Welp.

## Day 4: Rush of Blood

In the afternoon I notice that getting up or sitting somewhat upright is now a
bad idea. Blood quickly flows into my leg and foot, but seemingly does not
leave again of its own accord. Instead the leg swells up. Despite the cast
being half open, it feels like maybe there is not enough room still. Pain pain
pain. I can only make the blood (and the pain) go away by elevating the leg and
foot and lying flat enough. This of course does not happen immediately, so I am
stuck with the pain for a while after getting up. From this day on I start
taking the painkillers more often (i.e., the prescribed amount).

## Day 5-7: Numbness, Darkness, and Bruising

In the evening of day 5, I notice both the big toe and the toe next to it are constantly
feeling a bit numb when I touch the skin. The index toe (?) is also noticeably
darker looking than the other toes. Combined with the increased pain, I start
getting worried that the cast is too tight. I can still move all the toes,
otherwise I would have rushed to the ER.

The next morning, I spot bruising on the darker toe. Evidently I am now even
more worried. I contact my brother's girlfriend, an MD, for her opinion. She
tells me an ER visit is not necessary, but that I should consider getting an
earlier appointment than the one I have set for day 12. Of course, today is a
Saturday, so this non-essential department is not working.

Day 7, a Sunday, ensures I feel worse still as the girlfriend already had
plans.  While she ensured all the necessary food was _in_ the house, I still
had to make and get it myself. Every such trip results in the aforementioned
blood flow and PAIN. Not a happy day.

Add to all that that it is really really clumsy to do anything when your hands
are occupied holding two crutches. Imagine doing things in the kitchen, but you
cannot move your feet while holding anything. You really have to plan where you
put what so you can get around, taking a step, move something, take another
step, move it a little further.

## Day 8: ER

[benparkes]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCZPqG0yh_xPm2AyLjffbDvw
[lactate-test]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-07-03-5000m-tt %} "5000m TT (of sorts) (7 Jul 2020)"
