---
layout: post
title: "Broken Ankle Chronicles: Phase 2"
date: 2020-10-01 18:00:00
tags:
- injury
- broken ankle
---

On Sunday 6 September 2020 I broke my left ankle. I tried to somewhat keep
track of the recovery process to maybe help someone in a similar predicament
frame the injury and know what to expect. I will describe significant events as
days since the accident. Day 0 is 6 September, day 1 is 7 September, and so on.

This post describes days 12 (18 September) through 25 (1 October).

<!-- TODO: Link to previous -->

## Day 12: A Trip to the Orthopaedist

I had really been looking forward to this day. I was more than sick of the
cast, I would finally be able to wash my leg and foot again. The pain had eased
up some in the previous days. I expected to need a cast still of course, but I
was optimistic that it would be one allowing me to walk. This was going to be a
joyful day.

Hah.

My hopes were quickly dashed. I was told that I was going to be given a lighter
synthetic cast (the previous one was plaster, which is noticeably heavier), but
that I still would not be allowed to put any weight on it. Damn. That was quite
the wave of disappointment. In retrospect, I can see I probably should have
expected as much. It had not even been two weeks since the mishap. At the time
though, I was really rooting for better news.

The nurse who removed my old cast commented on the drawings my girlfriend had
made on it. She wasâ€¦ surprised to hear it was not drawn by a five year old. She
agreed with me that it did not matter, at least the girlfriend had fun with it.
The material of the synthetic cast is easily coloured before applying, so I was
given a choice of eight colours to choose from. I picked purple. The nurse went
to look for a colleague to help her with the actual application to my leg.

As they got ready, the colleague asked whether nurse 1 had picked the right
colour. Apparently purple is not often picked by men. Darned gendered thinking!
Either way, a snug fitting cast was applied and I was off to the races. And by
races I mean off back home to lie down some more. Since I still could not use
the leg and foot, I would also have to keep on giving myself shots of Clexane
in the belly. Gotta ensure my blood does not clot up and cause issues
elsewhere. Also still got to keep it elevated.

<!-- TODO: Purple cast picture here. Also no cast picture -->

## Day 13: A New Pain

I woke up with a painful pinky toe. The cast is noticeably too narrow on that
side and the pressure on the sole of that area is also rather strong. On top of
that I cannot move the big toe without _a lot_ of pain in the middle of the
foot. My non-professional opinion is that the pressure on the top of my foot is
too much, there is a constant pain there. If I try to move the big toe up, it
raises the associated bones (try it), making the pressure way too much. The toe
next to the big toe is still noticeably darker skinned than the rest too, but
at least the numbness is no longer around.

All the pressure had one advantage: I could no longer move my foot around in
the cast. In the previous one I had ended up having too much room and
"swimming" in the cast. I had been easily able to shift the position of my
ankle upwards and downwards. I had been also able to move my foot up and down.
All not ideal for moving I am sure. On top of that, my body had gotten really
intent on triggering morning stretches for that leg. I assume because it did
not like the lack of movement. Such movement was rather painful though, so as
soon as I noticed the automatism, I had to do my best not to stretch. Very
annoying. Nothing of that in this new cast, I could not move inside the cast.

In the evening I noticed my appetite had lessened. We had ordered Chinese food.
Whereas I usually eat 1.5 to 2 dishes, now I was done after 1. The lack of
movement must have caught up to my energy needs.

## Day 14-17: More Pain

The pain was still intense the next day and I started taking painkillers. I did
downgrade from the prescribed ones (my prescription had ended) to more regular
500mg paracetamol ones. They were not heavy enough, but I did not want to
overdo painkiller dependence either.

The night from day 15 to 16, I woke up five times because of the pain from the
pressure all around. The front tendons connecting the foot to the leg had
readded themselves to the list of painful areas, so that was fun. Later that
day I also noticed the skin between the pinky toe and the one next to it was
heavily peeling. They are not used to being pressed together. To help out I
placed some cloth between both toes. I kept that there for the days to come.

I also ended up calling the hospital to see if they perhaps had an earlier
opening to have a look at it. Surely I am not supposed to constantly in pain in
locations completely unrelated to the actual fracture? Just as with the
previous cast, I had no luck. If it was really unbearable, I should just pop by
the ER. My past experience with that had left me salty, so I did not bother.
Instead I tried to attack the cast with some scissors, but that did not work
out. This glass fibber mixture is pretty sturdy.

Appetite still down from the usual.

## Day 18-19: Salvation

I woke up before 6:00, once again with a lot of pain in the pinky toe area. I
could not fall back asleep and went to the living room. I had a new idea to
help my toe. Rather than outright destroying the cast, perhaps I could bend it
to my will? Literally. I grabbed some pliers, used it to grab the cast near the
toe, and started forcing it outwards. After a while of this, the pressure had
eased some. So simple and it took me so long to think about!

<!-- TODO: Pliers picture, bent cast picture -->

Later that day I have some first proper attempts at sitting up and working
again. Careful optimism that things will be better from here on out.

The next day confirms the pliers solution worked. I stop taking painkillers.

## Day 21

The view of the cast is a constant stark reminder of my disappearing muscles.
Whereas it started out very snug around the calf, now it feels and looks roomy.
I can easily put some fingers in there. With dread I think about the effort it
will take to get back to normal.

Despite the extra room, my leg and foot still swell and turn red every time I
try standing up. On crutches of course, still not allowed to put weight on the
leg. They continue swelling and turning redder as long as I stand up. At least
it does not lead to the same pains as two weeks earlier. I avoid standing up
for too long, dropping back down in the couch to stick my leg in the air and
wait for the blood to run back out.

At the time I wrote down: "SO SICK OF THIS".

## Day 22-25: Moody

This is not a fun time. My mood has taken a big hit with all the lack of
movement. On top of that I have been sleeping bad since stopping the
painkillers. I have never been good at falling asleep, but the painkillers had
been really helpful with at least being able to fall asleep in the evening.

At some point some resistance bands I ordered arrive. I start improvising some
workouts with them to not feel as useless.

The mood affects my work, I have no motivation to do any of it.

Even the upcoming (day 26) appointment with the orthopaedist does not fill me
with cheers. I am just expecting more bad news.
