---
layout: post
title: "Broken Ankle Chronicles: Phase 3"
date: 2020-10-15 18:00:00
tags:
- injury
- broken ankle
- rehab
---

On Sunday 6 September 2020 I broke my left ankle. I tried to somewhat keep
track of the recovery process to maybe help someone in a similar predicament
frame the injury and know what to expect. I will describe significant events as
days since the accident. Day 0 is 6 September, day 1 is 7 September, and so on.

This post describes days 26 (2 October) through 39 (15 October).

<!-- TODO: Link to previous -->

## Day 26: A Trip to the Orthopaedist

With a heavier heart I once again make my way to the hospital. After another
X-ray, I eventually find myself in the doctor's office. Up till this point I
had always been handled by one of the doctors doing their residence. This meant
they did not have an office. Instead I was always dumped in one of the rooms
the nurses use to handle a patient. This in turn meant the doctor had no setup
to really show me my injury. While they had evidently described things, that
only does so much.

Now in the actual doctor's office, he invited me to look at his computer screen
displaying my fracture. My heart dropped as he pointed out the fracture. He
explained it was a type A fracture of the fibula. I looked at it and it still
looked clearly broken. A clear line separated a tiny piece of fibula from the
rest of the bone. Had I not been healing? Luckily the doctor's narrative did
not match my own. He said things were evolving the right way and everything
looked nicely in place. I was going to be allowed to start putting weight on
the leg again! Then he dropped a bombshell. He gave me two options.  The first
one a "walking cast", which he did not describe in detail, but I assume it
would be like any cast but with some more protection at the bottom.  Then came
option two though.  Oh boy I did not see this one coming.

NO! MORE! CAST!

WHATâ€½ OPTION TWO! OPTION TWO! ALWAYS OPTION TWO! I doubt I managed to prevent a
grin from showing on my face. This was way more than I had hoped for.  As the
doctor explained it, with the way the fracture was aligned, there was little I
could do wrong to it. He said that taking the cast off would also be better for
the muscles and tendons in that they would be able to move some more. More
blood flow, better healing, or something. He did not need to give any reasons.
The idea of no longer having to deal with an uncomfortable or painful cast was
already more than enough to convince me. He added that that would also no
longer require me to give myself shots in the belly. Dude seriously, OPTION
TWO. He told me to come back in two weeks and sent me to the nurses to take the
cast off.

The nurse got the saw ready to cut off my cast. Before doing it she did the
usual spiel of explaining why I should not worry about the saw. I was not
really listening. If it were really dangerous, they would have thought about
another way to do something so routine by now. She slid some plastic strip in
my cast to protect my skin just in case the saw did go to deep. She started
sawing and when she was about halfway I took a look. I was not sure she was
actually sawing above the plastic strip. Seconds later I feel pain, she sawed
into my skin. Luckily it did not go deep. From there on she also was more
careful not to go any deeper than the hard cast. Still, just my luck. So far
for her safety speech.

Dont recognise leg

Barely any ankle mobility

still swelling

No kine needed yet
