---
layout: post
title: "Lactate Test and a Training Update"
date: 2020-06-11 18:00:00
tags:
- training
- lactate-test
---

I had high hopes for this spring, but the COVID19 lockdown ruined most of it.
Luckily I have remained motivated to train throughout. A coach at my club,
[Atlemo][atlemo], suggested I could give a lactate test a try to see where I am
at. I ended up agreeing and thought I would take the opportunity to write
another blog post. Time to reflect on the past months of training and cast a
hopeful glance into the future.

## Training

_This section was written before the lactate test happened on 13 June 2020._

### Running

After the [BSK indoor][bsk-indoor] at the end of February, I was a bit
disappointed with my result. The goal for spring, however, remained the same:
sub-17 5000m. My idea was to stick to 100 km for my regular weeks and try to
decide on a race in May or June as the main goal. I did not have any in mind
yet, so started out with just some CV and **T**hreshold work as a way to
maintain.  Two weeks went by easily.

And then the world fell apart. COVID19 hit Belgium and we went into lockdown
mid March.

That Friday 13 March, I improvised 200m **R**epetition work on a flat-ish
marked stretch, part boardwalk, too narrow when people are around. It was the
third up week of 100 km, so the 80 km down week that followed was nice to
rethink my planning.  It was quickly becoming clear that any tune-up races
might be out the window.  Tracks were closed down too. Threshold seemed like an
easy one to keep in the planning as it does not need to be as precise, but I
did not want to do that two times a week. As second workout I planned in 400m R
work, figuring I could work on speed a bit. Of course for that one, a track
_would_ be much better, but I hoped I could mimic it enough by just going hard.
On longer type workouts (like CV or VO2max) I thought to be more likely to
settle into a pace that might not be hard enough, without a track to ground me.
As always, Sundays remained for long runs.

The thresholds felt pretty good. I run them by heart rate to keep the effort
consistent, but the pace surprised me at times. (~18 min 5k) After two weeks,
it was becoming more clear that no races would be happening any time soon and I
dropped them from training. Instead I switched to two **R**epetition workouts
per week to work on form and speed.

For the 400 metres, I found a straight bike path where I used my watch's GPS to
find two landmarks more or less the right distance from one another. I debated
getting a rolling measuring tape to Do It Right™, but eventually accepted that
it was not going to get perfectly measured. Heck, it was not even flat. At
least I could be consistent with my stretch of running. I would alternate the
direction of the stretch on every rep.

The first week (the week of 23 March) I did 10 repetitions, aiming for 76
seconds at the slowest. The next week I changed that to 12. Eventually I split
it up into 3×4 to allow for bathroom breaks. Either way, it was all R work for
the weeks after that. How this workout felt, depended heavily on the weather.
There is no shade on this stretch and the time I usually ran it at placed the
sun beaming straight at me. More annoying was the wind. Quite often it felt
like it was blowing straight along the path. If that happened to create
headwind on the uphill direction (recall it was not flat), then it made for
really rough work in the one direction and really easy super speedy work in the
other direction. A track was sorely missed.

Mid April I decided to make good use of the extra free time I had gained from
not commuting any more. I bumped up the weekly distance from 100 km to 110 km.
I think my body handled it well enough and it is now the new normal. My usual
split is: 10k recovery, workout totalling 17-18k, 15k GA, 10k-7k recovery
double, workout totalling 17-18k, 10k recovery, long run to fill up the
distance.

Eventually (i.e., the week of 11 May), I got word that my athletics club would
be reopening training. Track's back, baby! I first passed by on 19 May and did
a _rough_ workout that the headcoach there suggested.

1. Sprint 200 metre. In an e-mail he had described this as "95%", but as I
   expressed confusion he said "just go all out". I do not know if he figured
   me going all out would mean I would inadvertently keep some reserve anyway
   for following repeats.
2. Run 1000 metre. "Faster than regular, but not too much." Should still be
   slower than marathon pace, for example. For this one he told me not to look
   at my watch and just try it by what felt right.
3. 2 minutes standing rest/walking back to the starting point.
4. Repeat.

The headcoach had said he would probably do five reps of this to start out
with.  I messed up the first rep as I did not realise the all out part.
Instead, I ran the 200m somewhat controlled (34s) and the 1000m way too fast
(3:37). I counted that one as wasted and figured I would do five after this one
instead (so six total). The next 200s I managed to run in 31.x seconds nearly
every time, though of course it is me manning the lap button too. I had trouble
keeping the 1000s easy enough, assuming the paces I have in my head are
correct. Eventually though, they started self-correcting: 3:54, 4:01, 4:12,
4:10, 4:16.

I still felt fine after that sixth rep, so decided to give a seventh rep a try.
The 200m still went well enough: 31.low. The 1000m stayed similar to the
previous ones in time (4:17), but I did not feel smooth any more. Probably
should not have done that. I felt this Tuesday workout still on Friday for some
track R work and it probably still somewhat affected me on Sunday in the long
run. I am yet to test it out again, though I would probably force myself to do
fewer reps when I do.

With the track accessible again, I reintroduced CV work, placing it on
Tuesdays. I have done that twice so far, splitting it up as 1200, 1000, 1000,
1200, 1000, 1000. Pace goal is 3:30-3:35 per km.

Talks with the head coach mentioned a lactate testing possibility. I decided to
give it a try as I had always been curious, but never really knew what to
expect. Mails with the tester eventually placed it on Saturday 13 June, which
happened to be a down week (now aiming for 85 km, no workouts, but some days
with strides). I was told to be rested for it, so that worked out fine.

### Strength

## Lactate Test

## Future

- Time trial
- Set some goals if competition restarts in August

[atlemo]: http://atlemo.be "Atletiek Vereniging Molenbeek (ATLE)"
[bsk-indoor]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-02-23-bsk-indoor %} "Belgian Indoor 3000m Championship for students (22 Feb 2020)"
