---
layout: post
title: "Slovenia Trip"
date: 2021-08-07 05:00:00
tags:
- trip
- slovenia
- runcation
- report
- walking
---

We went to Slovenia the other week. I have come to the realisation that I
forget too much about some of my other trips, instead piecing things together
based on photos when I look at them years later. In an attempt to change this a
little, I thought I'd write some thoughts about it down. Maybe just go full
diary-with-pictures at it. A lot of the trip was running and walking around, so
it seemed fitting enough to post it here. In total we ended up spending seven
days there that I could say something meaningful about, so I will just go
through those here too.

## Day 1: Lost in the Woods and Too Much Hiking

### A Run

{% include location.html lat=46.3105 lon=13.9946 description="The forest I got a little lost in on this run." %}

I had only planned a 10k run this morning and spotted a loop on the map that
would take me through some forests as well as the next town over. The parts in
the forests were not marked trails. I was not aware of this fact, nor did I
realise it actually mattered. Instead these seemed to be paths used for logging
and as such, were not quite as consistent with the map as I had hoped. My
original path ended up stopping in a tree wasteland.

No worries, there was a side path that seemed to get me in largely the right
direction so I followed that instead. Repeat this a few times. Eventually, only
a slow and steep 1.6 km into the run, the path ended at a horse pasture with
fencing. I did not feel like going back the way I came and instead spotted
another steep upwards path that looked passable. Half a km further this ended
in a tree wasteland, another logging path.

Kind of sick of this, I just decided to push straight through the woods up
ahead. There was no path, but (1) I figured it was generally the right
direction, and (2) I was hoping there might be a path popping up that was not
on the map. As luck would have it, a path did appear! I followed this for a
while, thinking it would lead somewhere. It did. You guessed it. Another tree
wasteland. However! In the distance I could make out an actual road, so once
more I decided to just push through the woods. Slow going, but the right
direction. I was a bit over this forest run. I ended up finding some fields,
running straight through those and making it to the road in the end. I was
maybe 3 km into the run and 40 minutes had passed. Whoops.

After that I stuck to some roads, found an actual marked trail up to a view
point, and finished the rest of the 10 km in less time than those first 3.

### A Hike

{% include location.html lat=46.2947 lon=13.8754 description="The first viewpoint on our climb, we went a little further still." %}

The hike planned today started in the village of Stara Fužina. We would end up
here a few more times this trip. From Stara Fužina, we went north-westish to
climb up to Vogar. I am still not sure if this is an actual named hill or the
name of the few houses at the top there. Either way, it was upwards from where
we started. Steeply upwards. We climbed around 500 meter, most of it across a
2.5 km stretch. That makes it pretty steadily around 20%. I am not sure what I
expected on this trip, but that was a bit of a rougher start than anticipated.

There were two nice viewpoints at the top and we watched paragliders take off
from the side of the hill for a while. Nice and relaxing before bombing back
down ourselves, no easy feat at that steepness. The terrain was also _very_
rocky, so you had to keep paying attention throughout. All in all that ended up
being a nearly 9 km walk with over 2h30 of moving time. Legs were tired from
the steepness, but I figured that was it for the day.

We immediately went to a restaurant in the village there (Residence Triglav
{% include location.html lat=46.28408 lon=13.89142 description="The restaurant is part of a hotel, luckily you do not need to be staying in the hotel to enjoy the meals." %})
which is a bit pricier than most places in the area, but was pretty fancy and
looked nice.

### A Hike Too Many

{% include location.html lat=46.35705 lon=14.07461 description="The top of our second climb of the day, having started in the center of Bled on the east side of the lake." %}

After that we went to the village of Bled, known for its lake with a church on
the island in the middle. I figured it would just be some sightseeing and
scoping out a place for the girlfriend who had to work the next day. We walked
a little bit, had a drink in a café that seemed to have good wifi for tomorrow,
then continued walking some more. The plan was to stroll around the lake a bit.

The stroll turned into a "let's climb this mountain on the other side" when we
passed by the west side of the lake. Apparently there were three view points up
there. When the girlfriend and her sister had made this trip about two years
ago, they had only managed to do one of them, getting lost after that and not
caring enough to press on. So up we went.

The view is nice enough, you see the lake from above, you get a good view on
the church on the island in the middle. Postcard picture. The different view
points were all pretty much the same to me though, so that got less
interesting. Legs were also not very happy any more: getting to the viewpoints
meant more climbing. Either way, we managed them all, climbing from just under
500m elevation to about 750m of elevation in the span of 2ish km. Yup, that was
steep again. Once done, we still had to walk back along the lake to the village
again too.

The Bled walking ended up totalling about 10km, 3 hours of moving time. By the
end we were all pretty done with it and dragged ourselves to an Asian
restaurant, no local cuisine tonight. After stuffing our faces we felt better,
but I was definitely hoping not every day would end up like this.

## Day 2: More Bled

{% include location.html lat=46.4008 lon=14.0993 description="Slap Šum (Šum waterfall)" %}

The girlfriend had to start work relatively early and I was not going to wake
up early enough, so my run was pushed to later in the day. Instead, we dropped
the girlfriend at the café while her sister and I continued on to the Vintgar
gorge (along the Radovna river) and the Šum waterfall at the end ("Slap Šum",
Slap being Slovenian for waterfall). The walk was pretty, the waterfall itself
underwhelming. Coming at the end of July might have made there not be enough
water to make it a nice sight. Bummer.

After getting back, we went to the girlfriend to say hi and rest briefly. We
then bought some lunch in the supermarket, checked out the castle on the north
side of Bled and then the toboggan on the south side of Bled. Looking back at
this, the walking was not super crazy, but my legs were a bit fed up with the
need to keep moving.

Once the girlfriend was done work, I changed into running clothes. She and her
sister would walk around the lake, I would run two laps to get to 13 km.  After
I finished that, I jumped into the lake to cool down and wash off the worst of
the sweat.  The water was not too cold once you were in, luckily. This way I
did not have to shower and we could immediately continue on to dinner.
Tonight's dinner was more traditional, in the "Gostilnica Štrudl" (
{% include location.html lat=46.27262 lon=14.95303 description="Gostilnica Štrudl restaurant." %})
where I consumed too many strudls and had some nice local craft beer (Jezernik
Summer Ale by Lintvern brewery).

## Day 3: Lake Bohinj and Viševnik

{% include location.html lat=46.28645 lon=13.88134 description="Location of Lake Bohinj that I ran around. Dipping in and chilling happened near the indicated location." %}

On this day, the girlfriend needed to work through the morning. She found a
bench in Stara Fužina, her sister went for a walk, and I went for a run. Having
done Lake Bled the day before, I decided to run around Lake Bohinj (Bohinjsko
jezero) today, another ~13 km run. The south side of the lake was a bit meh to
run along, there was a gravelly path, but there was a car road and small
treeline between you and the lake. The north side was nicer, a more traily
experience, no cars, just nature and lake. Once the run was done, I dipped into
this lake too for a rinse. I had time to waste waiting for the girlfriend, so I
chilled in the water and on the beach for a little hour. Sun was shining so the
water was quite nice. Just don't go deeper than 1m50 or so, it quickly cools
down. Cold mountain water I presume. The area can get pretty crowded with
people, but I was lucky to be early enough and had some peace and quiet. First
truly relaxing moment of the trip? I enjoyed it, things had been a bit too
intense so far.

Afterwards I made my way back to the girlfriend. I don't know if it was
something in the lake, but I was followed by a swarm of flies for almost a
kilometer. If I did not wave my arms around, they would all converge on my arms
and I would get a gross covering of flies chilling there. When I reached the
village they finally left me alone.

{% include location.html lat=46.35898 lon=13.89824 description="Mount Viševnik" %}

In the afternoon, a climb up mount Viševnik was planned. We started around
1400m of elevation at Rudno Polje. You can park in the collection of four
buildings called Rudno Polje  and walk a little bit extra, or you can park in
the following spot right at the bottom of the ski slope and skip a small extra
walk ({% include location.html lat=46.3483 lon=13.9156 description="Informal
parking location right at the bottom of the ski slope." %}).  We climbed up,
first along that ski slope, but quickly on much more challenging rocky terrain
as we left the ski slope behind. The first 1.2 km averaged about 25% if I
calculated that right. Another day of steepness and paying attention to
footing. The views were great, hulking mountains and deep valleys on all sides.
It's just not something you find in Belgium. Downside: the steepness eventually
got to my right achilles. I started feeling it, I had overused it a little.
About 2/3rds up the climb the complaining started and I had to stretch and rest
my legs a few times. I am not the most bendy at the ankles which does not help
when going up so steep a climb.

As we neared the top, we saw what we think is an Alpine Ibex. The horns were a
bit short, so it would have to be a younger specimen (... or just some mountain
goat). Evidently it was a bit shy so we could not get close for the most
precise view, but until told differently, we assume it was one. It is the
cooler story after all.

We got to the top eventually at 2050m. There was a couple sitting there
enjoying the view. I overheard them and they were Belgian. Figures that you
travel halfway across Europe and up a mountain only to find compatriots. I
ignored them entirely, of course. We too enjoyed the views, took some pictures,
had a snack, and finally prepared to get back down. I had an easier time
bombing down than going up, so I just went at comfortable-for-me pace and
waited from time to time for the girlfriend and her sister who took a more
careful approach.

{% include location.html lat=46.27249 lon=13.98188 description="Penzion Resje restaurant." %}

Afterwards we went for dinner in Penzion Resje, having some more local cuisine,
and a local beer (Polesnjak by Lintvern brewery). I probably should have taken
note of _what_ we ate to make this paragraph more useful, but here we are. The
server was really nice so if you ever pass by there, I hope you have the same
service! We were eating outside and near the end of the meal it started
thunderstorming and pouring down. Good timing. The drive back to the airbnb was
an interesting one: paying attention in the darkness combined with rain, but
the lightning views were pretty amazing.

## Day 4: Three Country Point and a boo-boo

Before this night I had said that my body needed more rest and this one proved
it. I slept in a bit. By the time I got up (9:25ish), I still felt very tired,
and also a little grumpy about that too. But the morning was wasting away and I
said I could postpone my run till later in the day, whenever and wherever we
could fit it in. I figured we wanted to get the day's hike started sooner
rather than later.

{% include location.html lat=46.5229856 lon=13.7140622 description="Three country point of Slovenia, Italy, and Austria." %}

We drove to the north west corner of Slovenia, to the village of Rateče. From
there, we climbed upwards to mount Peč aka Monte Forno aka Ofen, the three
country point of Slovenia, Italy, and Austria. Coming from the Slovenian side,
there are two main ways to reach it. Though you do not have to make that choice
until you are a few km into the walk. The first option is the one we took going
up and it is exclusively for walking. It is a series of, if I recall correctly,
30 switchbacks in a forest, constantly climbing upwards. A countdown for the
switchbacks is painted on the trees, so at every turn, you know how many more
you have to go. The second option is a wide gravel path that I think you can
technically drive up, though I don't recall much parking space to speak of at
the top. It is also the way you would take when biking up and down. We took
this way down to make it a bit easier on ourselves.

At the top is a border marker stone, some monuments aimed at promoting the
friendship between the countries, and mementos of how the border used to be.
The Austrian side also gives you a magnificent view on a big valley. Walk a bit
further east from the border marker, staying on the Austrian side, and you will
find a two cafés/restaurants and a cable cart taking you up and down to the
village of Arnoldstein. We hung around a bit, had a drink and a bite in one of
the two places, and eventually made our way back down the easier of the
Slovenian options.

With the newfound knowledge of border marker stones, we suddenly spotted quite
a few of them showing the Slovenian-Italian border. A sizable portion of the
path is right next to the border so you can spot them between the trees a few
meters in.

{% include location.html lat=46.46252 lon=13.73752 description="Zelenci natural reserve, its main observation point." %}

By the time we got back down, most of the day was behind us already. We did a
quick stop at the Zelenci natural reserve. From the parking lot it is only a
400-500 metre flat walk to the main spot of this reserve. This made it a bit
disappointing as it was overcrowded with instagram girls and people with no
respect for nature. We quickly continued on to Lake Jasna, where I would get my
run in while the girlfriend and her sister would walk around a little. The run
was... not ideal.

{% include location.html lat=46.47437 lon=13.78376 description="Lake Jasna" %}

I quickly felt a rather strong need to poop, luckily getting to a toilet
eventually. Then I had done all the stuff at the lake, and around the lake was
not an option because it was tiny and there were too many people, so I went up
into the mountains. This went OK for a while, the path was a wide packed gravel
path that could probably fit a car or two. Easy peasy. Figures that on that
exact path I manage to twist my left ankle while still being a while away from
the car. I did not feel it going upwards, but it was hell when running
downwards. I had to be real careful with it and was glad when I finally reached
the car. The section where I twisted my ankle was basically flat and, as
mentioned before, not very difficult terrain. Perhaps the tiredness was
catching up to me in terms of not paying enough attention (small rock that
cause the twisting) and the body being tired leading to easier injury.

We were going straight through another restaurant from here, so I still needed
to clean myself. Third lake in a row, here I come! Sadly for me, the sun had
set behind the mountains by now and the lake was _cold_. I dipped my toe in and
wanted to nope out of that. Eventually I braced myself and jumped in. The
pressure change did not feel good on the ankle, but what was worse is the cold.
You know that description people give of little daggers stabbing you all over
your body? I found out that that is pretty accurate. I quickly grabbed the
ladder to get back out and onto the little pier so I could dry myself.  Clean
enough!

{% include location.html lat=46.36854 lon=14.03530 description="Gostilna Zatrnik restaurant" %}

We drove quite a ways back to our side and stopped at a little restaurant
(Gostilna Zatrnik) on the way from Krnica and our village. We arrived there
rather late, but luckily were still allowed to order food. I got a bear stew
(cause how often can you say you've had bear), which if I recall just seemed
like the Belgian stoofvlees dish to me. There was also a big fluffy dog walking
around who clearly knew what he could expect from the guests, he quickly came
begging for some scraps. He got some in the end, thus perpetuating the begging
cycle.

When driving back to Koprivnik after meal, we noticed how clear the sky was.
This was the first night where this was the case, so we looked for a good spot
and parked on the side of the road to look at the night sky. Compared to
Brussels, the view was magnificent, reminiscent of our trip in the Mojave
Desert. You could easily see the Milky Way and near the horizon we also spotted
a bright blob that I later figured out was probably Jupiter. I wish there
wasn't as much light pollution in Belgium as there is.

## Day 5: Cannot Move Much

It was pretty clear from the moment that I got out of bed that I would not be
running or doing crazy walks today. The left ankle I had twisted the day before
was still pretty painful, especially when put into weirder positions.

## Day 6: T-storms and another Gorge

## Day 7: Ljubljana
