---
layout: post
title: "20 km door Brussel"
date: 2021-09-12 12:00:00
tags:
- report
- road
- length:20000
---

After two successful track races in August, I was eager for more in September.
However, there were not as many options nearby in distances I cared for. My eye
fell on the Brussels 20 km. I had not been training for it specifically, but I
figured jumping in it could be nice if the weather worked out. Usually this
race is held at the end of May, but due to COVID19 it had been cancelled last
year and postponed to fall this year. I kept pushing back the decision whether
to take part and in the end started leaning towards taking part 5-6 days prior
to the race. I ended up signing up on Thursday, with the race happening that
Sunday. Perfect prep.

## Training

Since the 5000m, I spent two weeks in Greece. The first week was a planned down
week, the second a normal (100k) volume week. It was a bit too warm there so I
did not bother with any workouts. There were some good hills to be had though,
so I did a few of those. Hills are speedwork in disguise, so I figured that
would do.

We flew back on a Saturday. The next morning (exactly a week before the 20 km)
I did a run-bike trail event with a friend. You both start at the same time,
one person runs, one person bikes, you can change whenever you want. We did not
plan on racing it, so kept it easy enough. The friend is a bit more casual with
running and the terrain made the biking more challenging than we expected. In
the end I ran the larger part of this event, 26 km to his 14 km. I had offered
beforehand that I could do about 25 km, so I did not mind. Just another long
run with some extras.

The week leading up to the 20 km, I started out as a normal week. So no
pre-race workout on Tuesday, since I had planned a regular workout for
Thursday. Of course, after the late sign up I pivoted the planning to add some
tapering for the 20 km. Ended up doing: 10k, 13k, 13k, 10k, 10k, and 6k the
days before the 20 km. As always some strides in that final run too.

## Goal and Strategy

My PB was set in 2019: a 1:18:20 slotting me 287th place. With the recent races
in mind, my goal was to be loftier. Calculators gave me 1:12:40-1:13:20. Of
course, that was based on races on the track so on the bumpy course that is the
20 km, I expected to be going a little slower. Still, I felt pretty certain I
could run sub 1:15 and 1:13:xx was the real goal. I figured I would start out
around 1:15 pace (3:45 / km) and switch to 1:13 pace (3:39 / km) around 7-8 km.
By that point in the race you are done with the first long climbing (with
tunnels), so it is a good point to assess how you are feeling. In theory.

I also gave this time when signing up, since 1:13:xx was what I hoped to run.
They did not check my credentials (though if they had, I could have backed it
up with the recent races) and just gave me an elite bib. The difference between
it and the "regular" first wave is not super crazy. You get some your own
smaller corral so you can jog back and forth a bit longer, but before the race
starts the barrier between the elites and the first wave is removed, so
everybody gets pushed together.

## Pre-Race Illness

The afternoon before the race, we went for a little walk with some friends.
Someone suggested to grab a pizza afterwards from his favourite pizzeria. I
figured why not, I eat the weirdest stuff before any long run. I admit I don't
know whether I can just blame the pizza for what is to follow in this section,
but it seems like the most likely candidate to me. The other option would be to
blame some leftover lettuce I had at lunch. Both looked and smelled perfectly
fine at the time. Either way.

I went to bed a bit "food burpy", like I had eaten too much, but I most
definitely hadn't. I did not take note of it at the time. I was asleep by
22:30ish. I woke up around 23:30 with cramps all around my belly. I had some
diarrhoea and a small bit of puking. Tried to sleep, but the cramps lingered
and I could not fall asleep. By about 0:30 the cramps were getting stronger
again and I used the toilet again. More diarrhoea and suddenly several bouts of
violent projectile vomiting, luckily all in the toilet. I am not sure I ever
had those levels of puking. It felt miserable and triggered a nose full of
running snot and tearing eyes. Once I was past that, the cramps seemed gone at
least. I figured that was the end of it and tried to sleep. After maybe 30
minutes of dozing I woke up again with cramps, rushed back to the toilet, and
had another bout of diarrhoea and violent puking. I thought my stomach had
surely been emptied after the previous one, but apparently not. After that
ordeal I managed to sleep about two hours till 3:something. Woke up again and
had more diarrhoea, no puking though. Then I managed to sleep from 3:30ish till
close to 7:00, when I had planned to wake up to prep for the race.

Still there was more diarrhoea, but I figured this must be the end of it.
Surely my body was empty now? I thought I would go through the motions of
getting ready for the race and seeing how things felt. I was not sure the body
would be happy with it, but if I did nothing and then felt perfectly fine at
9:30, I would be annoyed with myself. I tried to eat my usual muesli (100g)
with soymilk (double that) and the belly strongly disagreed with this choice. I
forced some in, slowly, not to upset the stomach, but I could not make myself
finish the whole thing. I had a cup of tea and over half a litre of water. In
retrospect I realise I should have forced way more liquids in.

I was starting to feel better so the girlfriend and I made our way to the metro
around 8:30, to arrive there by 9:15ish. She had offered to carry my stuff
during the race. A brief warmup was not filling me with confidence as the area
around the solar plexus felt a bit cramped up (is that a thing??). Well, I was
just going to give it a go. I've often felt shit before a race and then felt
fine during, I was still rooting today would somehow turn out to be one of
those days.

## Race

It was not one of those days.

After just one kilometer I had a weird cold sweat thing going. Quickly, the
pace felt terrible and we had not even hit the tunnels yet. These were still
the relatively easy first few km: downhill for 600 metre, uphill for a bit
longer (but less steep, then flat(_ish_) till just past the 3 km mark. It never
felt right. I was going a bit faster than intended, but not a pace where
everything should be feeling like the struggle that it did.

I also immediately grabbed a water bottle, thinking I would continue working on
rehydration. This failed completely as most of the water ended up slapping into
my face. I have told myself this in the past, but I never got around to it: I
should really practice drinking while running fast. Frustrated, I threw the
bottle away after only getting a few tiny sips in.

Also notable is that one of the 1h20 pacers was well ahead of me this entire
time. That threw me off a little, but I was quite sure he was wrong.

{% include racesplit.html content='
All splits I will list are manual splits when I passed the race signage for the
distance. Garmin lists numbers past the comma too, but I will not list those.
Blame them for any seemingly off-by-one errors though. First three km: 3:44,
3:38, 3:37. Average pace of 3:40 for the first three km.
' %}

While the splits are definitely a bit faster than planned for those first 7 km,
I knew that the Louisa line was to follow now: net uphill for the next few km
with three tunnels thrown in. As soon as I did the first tunnel though, I knew
it was going to be a sufferfest. Going into the tunnel is always easy of
course, but coming back out was _hard_. I struggled. The struggling did not
improve in the next few tunnels. People were starting to pass me. I told myself
to hold out till the 7 km mark, then the course would let up a little bit. The
heart rate was in the low 170s a few times, while ideally I would have wanted
high 160s. I figured dialling that in slightly and holding out till the easier
parts might save me.

{% include racesplit.html content='
The four km split after hitting the first tunnel is telling: 4:21. Assuming the
race signage can be trusted of course. Then followed a 4:03, 3:56, and a 4:18.
The first five km were completed in 19:25, so 3:53 pace, or a 1:17:40 20 km.
These past four averaged to a 4:10 pace.
' %}

I crested that first major top and still felt terrible. I tried to latch onto
some people that passed by me a few times, but it was not working. As we went
largely downhill for a few km, my heart rate got a bit more under control: low
160s. However, I also felt like I could not push my body to even go harder. The
heart rate was no longer the worry, the body just did not have the energy to
move the legs fast enough. Soon we left the Terkamerenbos and passed the 10 km
mark. I strongly considered calling it quits there and then. The only reason I
didn't was that I was quite far away from the finish line. I did not want to
get back to the finish line while walking or taking the public transport.
Instead, I figured I would push on.

Once I made that decision, I also considered the possibility of still PRing
(1:18:20). If I somehow recovered enough on the downhills of the second part of
the race, it was still a possibility. It felt very unlikely, but I needed
something to focus on.

{% include racesplit.html content='
Kilometers eight through ten: 3:48, 3:57, 3:38. Though that last one may be a
bit early. There were two different 10 km markers and I had clicked on the one
placed maybe 100m before the other one... Manual split the 10 km at 39:05.
Official split at 39:12. So that is either 1:18:10 or 1:18:24. Still PR
territory if I could recover.
' %}

First I still had to get through a bit of climbing though. After 10 km you
first climb for a km or two before you get some downhill reprieve. The climbing
was hard and even there I barely managed to get the heart rate up past 165. The
body was having none of it. The pace took another hit. Even going downhill
afterwards was unpleasant and I was just counting down till the end.

Once past the 15 km mark I started noticing more red cross signs and was
tempted to stop at one of them every time. I never did see people near those
signs though, maybe they were chilling till the masses would show up. Thus I
stayed just tempted, but not convinced. I trudged on.

{% include racesplit.html content='
The 11 km sign is the only one I missed, so that hill is combined into one
split: 9:12. If the previous marker was indeed a bit earlier, then this should
be a bit shorter. Once past that, the pace was 3:41, 3:59, 4:06, 4:05, and
4:02. So about 4:10 pace since the 10 km marker.
' %}

I went through 17 km with an average pace of 4:00, or 1h20 finish time. Of
course, right around that point, the final dreaded climb starts: Tervurenlaan.
If you are still feeling alright at this point, you can claim you barely notice
the bump. If you are feeling bad, prepare to feel worse. I definitely fell in
the latter category. My pace dropped even further as I dragged myself up the
hill. I just kept telling myself it was almost over and that maybe I could at
least dip below 1h20 still. If the 18 km split had properly registered in my
brain, then I would have known that was not going to happen.

Upside to this climb: I was going so slow that I finally managed to properly
drink from the water bottle I grabbed at the side.

Once past the peak, I usually try to speed up a little, squeezing every last
bit out of what my body still has to offer. On this day, I did not even try. I
just kept it somewhat the same, repeating to myself that it was almost over.
Just keep the effort going and it will be the quickest way to end this run. The
energy of the final km (and then especially the final 200m), seeing others
sprint to the line, did get to me a little and I tried some last bit of a push
too. My heart rate crossed back into the 165-167 range, but that was about it.
I just did not have the energy to push.

{% include racesplit.html content='
My final three splits are 4:50, 4:04, and 4:00.
' %}

## Aftermath

Soon as I crossed the line, I veered to the side towards the barriers at the
side from where the crowd watches. I just wanted to sit down and lean against
something. I sat there for a bit, trying to find energy to move. A medic team
walked by and I was half tempted to ask them for some help in terms of
hydration. I figured I could still take care of myself though and instead got
up and started shuffling through the finish zone.

I was given a bottle of water that I downed immediately. I got some energy bar
and the thought of eating anything was upsetting my stomach. I stumbled slowly
to the spot I would meet the girlfriend at, she arrived a little later. I sat
and lied down on the ground for at least 10 minutes, sipping water, trying to
imagine eating food, and having the stomach rebel at the thought. I managed to
eat a quarter of an orange, but did not try any more. My body was shivering and
my hands were trembling as I was sitting and lying there, not that I was
particularly cold as I had already changed into sweats.

I said to myself that if food was a no-no, then sugary drinks would be the way
to go. I forced myself up to shuffle towards the metro, the sooner I got
moving, the sooner I could start fixing the body. We grabbed two
juices/"healthy smoothies" from the first place we passed, then took the metro
home. I slowly sipped them, not daring to drink too quickly as the stomach was
still a bit upset at the idea. When we got home I soaked in a bath while the
girlfriend was kind enough to fetch me some more sugary drinks. My stomach
still did not like the idea of food and even got in a twist from the smell of
something she was eating. I did not move much that afternoon and just kept on
drinking the sugary drinks. Hydration and calories.

By the evening I felt a bit more certain I would be able to eat something. We
ordered Chinese food for the occasion. Usually I eat about 1.5 to 2 portions.
Now I had maybe 0.75. It was not a lot, but it would have to do. Come morning I
could at least eat my muesli again and at lunch I ate bread without issues
(though also quite a bit less bread than usual).

## Results

Oh right, the numbers. Obviously nowhere near what I had hoped or even what I
had expected on a bad day. The final result was 1:21:16, my Garmin recorded
1:21:09. Now that I think about it, I wonder if the difference is chip vs gun
time. Since I had an elite bib, I wonder if that got me added into a gun time
category. This would normally not be much of a problem, but for some reason
they made us start like 50 metre from the actual start line, which is a
bottleneck to begin with. That's a dumb way to lose some time if you are
chasing a PR... In other years the first wave closes in on the elites, who are
standing at the actual start line. This year instead the elites were pushed
back to the line of the first wave. I hope they fix this for coming years. I
hope they realise this is an issue to begin with.

Anyway, 1:21:09 is what I think I'll take. Chip time all the way if they mess
it up. That is a 4:03 pace. Three years ago I would be overjoyed with the
result. Now I can only feel disappointed that the race was lost before it even
started. Some people have told me it's quite alright all things considered, but
eh, I'm not feeling it. Place at the time of writing is 371st. As you might
expect, I did not improve either timing or placing with a race like that.

|Year|Time|Rank|
|:--:|---:|---:|
|2015|1:30:41|2833|
|2016|1:30:40|2345|
|2018|1:27:59|984|
|2019|1:18:20|287|
|2021|1:21:09|371|

The coworkers and former coworker still hover around the same ballpark:
1:31:16 (2:30 off PR), 1:35:19 (he PRed, but was aiming for sub 1:35), and
1:38:14 (no PR).

The seemingly incorrect pacer was indeed incorrect. He passed through 10 km in
37 minutes. Yikes, I hope those that followed him knew what he was doing.

## Future

Healing up and forgetting about this is the way to go I reckon. I have my eyes
on a 5000m and a 10,000m, both on the track. I am leaning towards doing both to
finish out the track season. My 10,000m especially should be a stupidly easy PR
as I am still using my 10 mile race for that one. Those two races would be
early October. After that I'll just recover and get back to base building.
Intensity wise anyway, the volume is largely OK I think.


[huizingen3000m]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2021-08-14-flanders-cup-oeh-3000m %} "3000m @ Flanders Cup OEH (14 Aug 2021)"
[5ktt]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-07-03-5000m-tt %} "5000m TT (of sorts) (7 Jul 2020)"
[results]: https://www.atletiek.nu/wedstrijd/startlijst/405127/78/ "Results SEN-M"
[results2]: https://www.atletiek.nu/wedstrijd/startlijst/405103/78/ "Results MAS-M"
[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/5832713409
