---
layout: post
title: "PK VB 5000m"
date: 2021-10-02 10:00:00
tags:
- report
- track
- length:5000
---

As the (track) season draws to a close, I am trying to squeeze in some final
races, preferably a 5000m. The provincial championships (PK or provinciaals
kampioenschap in Dutch) are usually held somewhere in spring, but due to
COVID19 they are instead being held in October. A nice opportunity for me!
While my club is located in Brussels, we strangely enough do not compete in a
Brussels championship, but instead go to the surrounding province of
Flemish-Brabant. The situation in Belgium is... complicated. Whatever! As long
as I can race. Provincial championship for Flemish-Brabant, here I come.

## Training

After my [_disastrous_ 20 km door Brussel][bxl20k], I took it easy for the
first week. I did not run anywhere near race pace during this 20 km race, so
the legs were not very beat up. I was however still recovering from the food
poisoning I had endured: I slept a lot, my appetite was still low, and I had a
lot of acid burps. Taking it easy meant I still ran, just not too much and
everything as easy as needed. By the end of the week I felt better and did a 20
km long run.  It was car free Sunday in Brussels and I did not want to let that
day go to waste. Otherwise I might not have bothered with the longer run. Still
totalled in the high 80s km for that week, but the body seemed fine with it.

The second week was a normal week again. I aimed for 100 km total with a
workout on Thursday and a long run on Sunday. As workout I decided on a VO2max
(Interval in JD speak) workout as that had been a while. It would be at ±5000m
pace, always good to practice that feeling. The plan was 5×1200 in 4:00 per rep
(3:20 per km, so a 16:40 5000m). Went largely OK, though my rests ended up
being a bit longer than originally planned (I had wanted 2 minute rests) due to
some talking, a toilet break, and feeling a bit shit after the fourth rep. It
also was just generally not very pleasant because the track was fuuuull of kids
not paying enough attention. Start of the new school year means more kids show
up, I think.

Friday evening I drank too much, stood around too much, and barely slept.
Apparently I am old now, because that really messed me up the next days.
Saturday was just generally a shit day where I trudged through a jog, Sunday
felt better, but my legs were still seemingly very beat up: calves (the right
one especially) were very tight. Still hit the distance for the week.

The third and final week I had planned another VO2max workout on Tuesday, with
the race on Saturday. I also planned to still sorta train through this race:
keep the weekly distance, but rearrange runs to give some semblance of rest for
the race. I did not want a "proper taper" because I had already planned to do a
road 10k (the Belgian Championships) the week after for which I _would_ do a
mini taper.

My calves still felt pretty tight and sore on Monday, so the idea of doing a
VO2max workout on Tuesday got less appealing. Add to that that I did not want
to be weaving through kids all workout again. In the end I did a much easier
workout: 4×5 min Threshold on the road. Should be about 3:35 per km (bit
slower), but since I did it on the roads, I did it largely by feel. Don't think
I went quite as fast as I should have, looking at my heart rate afterwards, but
it would have to suffice.  The calves felt better that morning and this run did
not aggravate them. Rest of the days I kept easy enough: 14 km, 13 km, 10 km
with some strides, Saturday race day. Any distance I would still be missing
after Saturday, I figured I could do on Sunday. In doubles if the body needed
it to be easier.

## Goal and Strategy

The signup list before showed there would be some way faster than me people,
some around my pace, and some a bit slower. For me the goal was to run a good
time, I did not expect to have a shot at the podium. Good time being: at least
PR ([16:46 unofficial PR][5ktt] vs [16:48.14 official PR][mechelen5000m]; the
goal being to break both), preferably sub 16:40, and really even nicer would be
to go sub 16:30. I was not really sure what to expect during the race, so I did
mentally prepare to at least partially time trial it. Some of the others had
16:2x filled in as recent times by the system, so my ideal scenario would be
for them to go out at exactly such a pace so that I could hold on to it. Sub
16:40 was the minimum I was going to be happy with, I just assumed PRing would
work out.

## Pre-Race

The race was not till 17:00, so getting ready for it eats up a lot of your day.
I had my usual muesli and soy milk for breakfast (about 120-130g of muesli I
think, double that in soy milk). Some tea, more water. Had lunch around 12:30:
4 slices of bread and a bowl or two of pasta leftovers (tomato sauce,
courgettes, bellpepper). Allowed some water till close to 14:00 I think. Headed
out around that time, arrived at the track a bit before 15:00. Scoped out the
place, sat around a while, started warming up by 15:45. Jogged around for 45
mins/9 km. Got my race gear, walked to the 5000m start, switched into it and
spikes, continued some jogging and short strides in spikes. Some stretching
inbetween, as much toilet breaks as necessary too (and then some).

## Race

## Results

## Future

[bxl20k]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2021-09-12-20km-door-brussel %} "20 km door Brussel (12 Sep 2021)"
[huizingen3000m]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2021-08-14-flanders-cup-oeh-3000m %} "3000m @ Flanders Cup OEH (14 Aug 2021)"
[mechelen5000m]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2021-08-22-openingsmeeting-mechelen-5000m %} "5000m @ openingsmeeting Mechelen (22 Aug 2021)"
[5ktt]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-07-03-5000m-tt %} "5000m TT (of sorts) (7 Jul 2020)"
[results]: https://update.me "Results"
[strava]: https://update.me
