---
layout: post
title: "Utah Trip"
date: 2022-02-09 10:00:00
tags:
- trip
- utah
- united states
- zion national park
- bryce canyon national park
- capitol reef national park
- us national parks
- runcation
- report
- walking
---

We spent a week visiting a few national parks in Utah, United States in
January. Following my plan from our Slovenia trip, where I decided to write
about it in some detail, I documented this trip too. With some luck it won't
take me six months before actually publishing this one.

## Overview

We flew into Las Vegas, it is by far the biggest airport in the area. The idea
was to drive to Hurricane, Utah, a city partially on the way to Zion National
Park and to spend the night there. The next morning we drove on to Zion
National Park and spend the day there. Overnight stay in neighbouring
Springdale. Another day at Zion, then the next morning we drove onwards to
Bryce Canyon National Park. Again two nights before heading onwards to Capitol
Reef National Park. There too, you guessed it, two nights before driving back
to Vegas (with a stop at Zion on the way). Sleep in Vegas and fly back.

## Day 0: Fly In

Diverted flight cause of Biden/Harris/Obama being in Vegas and using the
airport when we were supposed to fly in. Our plane was diverted to Phoenix,
Arizona. We deboarded for a short stint before being put back on the plane and
flying into Vegas. Get a rental car, pass by REI for my microspikes, pass by
Whole Foods for some dinner, drive to Hurricane. Did not get there till about
23:00 (I think?) so I did not manage to get a run in here. Straight to bed and
pass out.

## Day 1: Zion

Wake up and drive straight to Zion. Do Angel's Landing (icy, dutchies, bit
dangerous feeling). Go run Sandy Bench Trail.
