---
layout: post
title: "Rotterdam Marathon"
date: 2023-04-16 14:00:00
tags:
  - report
  - road
  - length:marathon
  - rotterdam
---

The Rotterdam marathon. My first go at racing a marathon.

## Overly Long Dramatic Intro

For as long as I have been running, people have asked me about whether I had
done or was training for a marathon. The thought never appealed to me. One
reason might be just to be contrarian. If everyone sees something as the thing
to go for, it manages to subconsciously lose its appeal to me. One reason might
be because of what a dumb distance it is. My running career was nurtured on
(albeit, badly Belgian measured) 5 kms, 10 kms, and 20 kms. Nice round numbers.
The marathon? Something with wanting to finish in front of the palace of some
now dead monarch, if memory serves. I think the major reason was though, that I
realised I liked trying to run fast. I saw the marathon as something people
moved up to to avoid having to go through the training to get faster. "Why run
harder when you can slow down for longer?"

Fast is relative of course. Fast is everyone that beats me in races. I remain
average. For a while I held off the boat with the excuse "I will think about
the marathon when I get faster and think I can run sub 3:00". That point came
and went as I improved on other distances, but my desire to run a marathon did
not develop. On the contrary, I had discovered track racing in earnest and
liked what I saw.

And yet. Over the past eight months, the idea of racing a marathon started
growing in my mind. I do not know if it is really true, but I like to say the
seed was planted when a colleague told me he was the best marathoner at the
office. He said it as sort of a joke, but he was right: of all those that had
run a marathon, he was the fastest. He added "and please don't run one". I can
get a bit competitive about things. Either way, I started thinking about
marathons. I also thought that while I do not care about the distance now, I
might start caring in a few years. By that time, some experience could come in
handy. With most people only racing a marathon 2-3 times a year, building that
experience would take time. Another point in favour of the marathon.

Back in, I want to say, November, I looked around a bit at the options for
spring marathons. Gent caught my eye because of its proximity. Going by
conversion from shorter distances, I might have also been able to run a top 20
(twenty) there. That always looks nice. Rotterdam also caught my eye. It is the
Netherlands, so it is flat. I had heard it was well organised. I saw the
results from previous years and I was going to have to work to be top 200 (two
hundred). That meant there would be a lot of people to run with in case the
going got hard. That has really dragged me through some bad spells in races in
the past, so if I had to make a choice, Rotterdam would be it. And then I
shelved the idea and sort of forgot about it.

Around the end of January, beginning of February, I thought about the marathon
again. I opened the Rotterdam marathon website. It had already sold out and...
I felt a pang of FOMO. That was the very moment that I realised I did want to
run Rotterdam. Bit late, innit?

Rotterdam marathon also has a "Vraag en Aanbod forum". Basically people with a
ticket that do not want to use it any more, e.g., because of injury, can offer
their ticket up for sale. Potential buyers then fill in their email address and
hope the seller picks them to talk to. As I write this, I do not know whether
they actually offered this in a language other than Dutch. Maybe not, to avoid
scams. From time to time I opened the forum and filled in my email address in a
bunch of offers. Weeks passed without a reply, but I figured even a sale three
weeks out from the marathon would be fine. I already had my training that kept
me busy, all that I would need to adjust was some taper time the final weeks
before the actual race.

Eventually someone contacted me and somewhere in early March, I was officially
signed up for the Rotterdam marathon.

<!-- Mailing to get into the wave? -->

## Training

I will only give a detailed overview of what happened since the [Belgian Half
Marathon Championships][bkhalf] 35 days (5 weeks) prior to this race. For more
details, check out that report. Basically during winter I had built up to 120
km per week and kept that steady, not really doing workouts. Six weeks prior to
that race (so 11 weeks prior to this marathon), I reintroduced workouts. LT
work and some Marathon pace attempts.

After the race, the plan was to do a recovery week, then two up weeks around
120 km with workouts. Finally two taper weeks with the race at the last Sunday.
I will count down to one in my weeks.

_Week 6_. Week of the half marathon race. Some lower volume as a mini taper for
the race. Race pace workout on Tuesday. Race on Sunday. Good effort, new PR,
yadeyade, see the other report.

_Week 5_. Planned post race recovery time. 10-13-13-13-13 for the weekdays.
Lower side of the belly felt sore. Legs more sore than they had been in a
while. Nothing worrying, just racing shenanigans. The night of Friday to
Saturday, things went to shit. Literally. I had a stomach bug, flu, whatever
you want to call it, and everything had to go. I forced some puking to
hopefully resolve the situation, but kept on feeling bad. Saturday I quickly
decided to not go for my planned long run. [Fool me once][20kbxl-sickly], don't
get fooled again, and all that. The non-literal runs continued, I had zero
appetite, and whatever I did have seemed to go straight through. I thought I'd
suffer for a day, but no, it continued for days on end. I lost Sunday too. Just
64 km for the week.

_Week 4_. I continued being sick and lost another three days of running. Five
days down the shitter. I lost 4 kg in the process and I do not have many to
lose. When I finally seemed past it, I dared to try running again. My body had
taken a beating though, everything felt like a lot of effort, I still needed to
regain all the energy I had lost barely eating for days. Rest of the week was
6, 10, 13, and 13 km. 42 km total. I did also manage a 17 km walk on Saturday.
Running too much too soon felt risky, but I figured a walk was more easily kept
easy or abandoned.

_Week 3_. I needed a good week still before the race and this one had to
suffice. I ran 120 km for the week, but did not feel quite right enough to do a
workout yet. Long run (30k) and mid-week long run (23k) went fine though. Also
made sure to have another go at practising taking in gels. That seemed fine
too, no stomach issues. For the 30 km I took five of them. First one at 2 km,
then another one every 4 km. 88 kcal per gel, 22 gram carbs.

_Week 2_. And then it was already taper time. It felt weird after just the one
up week because of the illness, but I felt more like playing this one safe.
Whether it was the right choice, I will never know. I put the plan for this
together rather belatedly, settling on 90 km for the week: 14, 10, 15, 10, 11,
21, and 9 km. Strides on Monday and Friday. A CV workout on Wednesday. If I had
not been sick and actually done workouts the two weeks prior, I would have done
VO2max then, and probably now too. In the current situation, I decided to not
try my first VO2max in a while just 10 days before the marathon. I did 4Ã—1000
aiming for about 3:21 to 3:26. Actual splits: 3:27, 3:23, 3:19, and 3:21. Had
actually wanted to do five reps, but something felt a bit off on the fourth
one, so I called it a day. Rest was about 1:10.

_Week 1, race week_. Not much running left at this point: 11, 10, 13, 10, 8, 6,
race day. Total prior to race day: 58 km. Wednesday I did 3 km at marathon
pace, but the GPS went all wonky and I was constantly speeding up and slowing
back down to get the pacing right. Maybe I should have done it on a track just
to be sure the one time. Considerations for another time. Either way, paces
were a bit all over the place, but it did not worry me. Strides on Monday and
Friday.

## Goal and Strategy

### Pace

Back when I first considered running this marathon, my then half marathon PR
put me just shy of 2:40. My PRs on the shorter distances put me under 2:40.
That looked pretty, but also probably just out reach. Then in March I ran
1:14:52 on the half marathon, which translates to a 2:36:35. All calculations
in this paragraph based on JD's vdot calculator.

So. Ye. That's really tempting. At first I was hesitant to go out that
aggressively on my first marathon. Surely it was safer to go out at 2:45? Play
it safe, don't blow up, keep the fast work for a future marathon. Alas, the
more I thought about it, the more I realised I wanted that sub 2:40. 2:40:xx or
2:41? Maybe, but probably not satisfied. Slower still? I think I would just be
disappointed. I am not trying to qualify for anything, I am not trying to beat
anyone. It's intrinsic motivation only and that one is now all in on sub 2:40.

So that is the **goal time: 2:39:59. That is 3:47.5 per km**. I think I will
just aim for that pace from the start. Banking time sounds risky, even with the
hypothetical few seconds per km I supposedly could go faster according to the
calculator. Starting too slow sounds risky too, cause that expects me to be
able to speed up in the second half. I don't know yet whether I will dare to
speed up if I do happen to feel good later on in the race. Either way, that is
a decision that I won't need to make till maybe 34 km into the race. Worries
for beat-up-by-the-marathon-me. We cross a bridge twice and go through a tunnel
twice, but besides that I don't think there is any elevation. So not much to
plan for on that end.

### Nutrition

I have a bunch of the gels I tried three weeks out (88kcal, 22g carbs). They
will have to do. I will bring at least six along. I am thinking take one at 2,
6, 10, 14, 18, 22 km. Have not quite worked that out yet as I am typing this a
few days prior to the race. There are water stands every five or so km, so be
sure to take some sips of that every time.

### The Others

I like the racing aspect of, well, racing. In a 5000m you can gamble to try and
follow somebody's move even if it feels hot. Probably a bit riskier to do that
in your first marathon. I picked Rotterdam cause there should be a good number
of people around my pace. I just have to make sure they do not lure me into
running too fast. Definitely run my own race the first 20-30 km, then evaluate
after. But damn, it may be difficult to rein myself in. I will have to tell
myself this a few times in the corral and during the first few kilometre.

## Pre-Race

### The Week

I found myself not thinking about the marathon as much as I would have expected
going by other people's accounts. Maybe cause it still feels like something
extra, not a main goal I have worked towards over months. It is running, how
much worse can it be than the suffering I always put myself through? I planned
out my logistics of course, but never sat around fretting. By this point I had
settled on my goal pace as well, so there was nothing that could be done any
more.

### The Weekend

### The Day

## Race

## Results

## Future

[bkhalf]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2023-03-12-belgian-championship-half-marathon %} "BK half marathon (13 Mar 2022)"
[20kbxl-sickly]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2021-09-12-20km-door-brussel %} "20 km door Brussel (12 Sep 2021)"
[results]: https://example.com
[strava]: https://example.com
