---
layout: post
title: "Belgian Championship Half Marathon"
date: 2023-03-12 18:00:00
tags:
- report
- road
- length:half
- bk
---

The [Belgian Half Marathon Championship][bkhalf] last year was my second time
running a half marathon. That time I set a PR at 1:16:43. This year the same
group was handling the organisation. A flat course and avoiding too many turns.
A field of competitors aiming to run fast and limited to those running 80
minutes or faster. What's not to love?

## Training

As [described before][winterbase], I spent the winter building my base. Almost
exclusively calm running to give whatever was causing the hip niggle to pop up
from time to time the chance to fully disappear (knock on wood). Meanwhile
pushing my weekly distance up to 120 km and holding it at that consistently.
Also made me add a mid-week (mid-)long run, usually of about 23 km once I hit
120 km weeks. All singles.

I decided to start reintroducing workouts in the week of 30 Jan-5 Feb, i.e.,
six weeks before the race (including race week). I will count down in this
section. Workouts are described in terms of their goal effort / planned idea. I
ran quite some by feel because of the undulating terrain, so that confuses the
matter further. Up weeks I aim for 120 km total, long run of 30 km. A usual
split over the week would be: 18, 14, 23, 14, 11, 30, and 10 km. All the rest
and meaningful deviations are mentioned explicitly further down.

_Week 6._ Monday I planned 2×3k LT, but because of a red light that became 3k,
~1.5k, and ~1.5k. Paces averaged 3:47, 3:42, and 3:52. Heartrate seemed to be
high 150s until the final km which was low 160s.

Wednesday I tried Marathon pace, something I had never done before. I was not
signed up for a marathon, but was tentatively trying to get into Rotterdam (16
April) still. When I saw Rotterdam had sold out, I realised I _was_ for the
first time in my life actually in the mood to try a marathon. Despite being
sold out, people can still put their bibs up for sale in case they got injured
or something similar. If I managed to at some point get a bib that way, I
wanted to at least have given Marathon pace a try beforehand. Wednesday was a
first try at that. I set out to do 12 km. Pace wise the calculators put me
around a 2h40 marathon (3:47-3:48 per km). I ended up aiming for that as the
faster end of a slightly more conservative range: 3:47-3:54. I had no heart
rate to aim for and the terrain was still undulating, so feeling wise I settled
on "feels easier than LT, but you gotta remember to push harder than regular
running". Splits were: 3:40, :54, :34, :45, :50, :59, 4:13, 3:38, 3:55, 3:57,
4:02, and 3:58. Heart rate apparently hovered around 155-157. I don't really
look at my watch during this. Just vibes. Also am doing Citystrides at the same
time (and really for almost all my runs) and it turns out dead ends are not
great when you're pushing the pace some.

Later that week my left hip area felt a bit more tired than I liked, so I
decided to do just one workout per week the rest of the weeks, replacing a
workout day with strides instead. No point overdoing things when you are coming
back to the harder work.

_Week 5._ Monday I did some strides. I do not really count them any more, just
winging it that I will hit something in the 6-8 range. Tends to work out.
Wednesday I did 12k Marathon pace again. Again mostly by feel, though I glanced
at my watch if I noticed it buzzing. Parts of these were on earth frozen into
weird angles which I had to navigate a bit carefully to not twist an ankle.
Other parts had thawed in the sun and instead of a muddy slippery upper layer.
That said, most sections were fine. Tried a gel to see what the stomach would
say: it was fine. Splits: 3:42, :59, :47, 4:03, 3:46, :49, :52, 4:03, 3:51,
:48, :38, :50. Heart rate in the low 150s, so that was likely not hard enough.

_Week 4._ I took a down week so that I could do two more up weeks before race
week. Two days with strides, a 25 km long run. 96 km total.

_Week 3._ Monday was strides again. By this point I had actually signed up for
the half marathon (I don't think I had yet the weeks prior), so I switched away
from Marathon pace and did some LT again on Wednesday. Planned to do 3×3k,
which comes down to about 30 minutes total. Aim for ~2 minute break in-between
reps. Seems I went by vibes again. If taking it more seriously on the flat, the
goal would probably be about 3:35 per km. Actual split: 3:43, :34, :40, jog,
3:29, :35, :50, jog, :49, :42, :49. Average: 3:41 per km. As before: undulating
and citystrides. Heart rate high 150s, low 160s near the end. Was happy when I
neared the end of the workout. I recall back in the day aiming more for like
170 for LT work though, so I might be taking these too easily. The realisation
did not bother me. I'm having fun. Felt a bit deflated for Saturday's long run,
like when you run out of carby energy. Not sure what was up with that, don't
think it was related to anything.

_Week 2._ Monday strides again, Wednesday 3×3k Threshold again. Same caveats.
Paces: 3:34, :41, :44, jog, 46, :32, :53, jog, :33, :27, :48. Average: 3:39. HR
a bit lower than last time. Was wearing chest strap and not sure if it connects
up perfectly. Eventually reached 160 in the last km.

_Week 1, race week._ Distances for the week: 13-16.5-13.5-13.5-10-6-24. Tuesday
I did race pace / threshold. By this I mean I wanted to see what a sub 1:15
half marathon might feel like, so I set out to do 2×2k at 3:33 per km. It was a
shitty day raining through the night, morning, and during the lunch workout.
Headwind for the stretch I planned to do the workout and there were soooo many
puddles everywhere. Sunday was also looking shit, so I saw it as a good test in
all manners. Felt a bit out of it in the warmup, but I was not deterred.
Splits: 3:31, :34, jog, :35, :31. Average: 3:33 per km. Perfecto. Heart rate
settled around 165 bpm. Feels like: maybe just a bit too fast for an entire
half marathon. Thursday and Saturday, I threw in some strides to keep the legs
on their toes (badumtsj).

## Goal and Strategy

My obvious goal was to PR, beating [last year][bkhalf]'s 1:16:43. I was not
sure what shape I was actually in though. I had been running a decent amount,
more than ever before, but not much of it fast. What could I run? Eventually I
thought "sub 1:15 looks pretty, let's do that". Was I capable of it? No clue.
Did I mind blowing up trying? Nah, just go for it. A true scientific approach.
Note: this is why I did the workout I did the Tuesday before the race, I wanted
_some_ feel of the pace.

## Pre-Race

I had to wake up at 6:00 to get ready and catch my train. Had my usual bowl of
muesli with soy milk (150g muesli, 300g soy milk). Did not have time for tea,
so just had some water. I took the metro to catch a train and brought a bike
along. Once dropped off in Ghent by the train, I biked the last 4 km to the
stadium from which he race starts. Could have also taken a bus for that part,
but would have involved more waiting around in the station.

Tried to use the bathroom (and would continue doing that periodically prerace
just in case). Grabbed my bib. Went to sit in the cafeteria to pin the bib onto
my singlet and the guy on the next table over was mentioning the wind might
make this tricky. It did not seem to have bothered him _that_ much in the end…
:)

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20230312.bashirabdi.webp' description='Bashir Abdi would end up winning the race in 59:51, a Belgian national record. He did conclude it could have been better with better weather.' %}

I started some stretches and tried to time my getting ready to not stand around
too long. It was around 8C and cloudy. Shorts and singlets would be fine for
running, not as much for standing still. Eventually changed and dropped off my
bag.<!-- The bag drop off looked well managed. You hand it off to a person and
it is put in an area that others cannot enter. Felt safe to leave all my stuff
and not wear running belt. -->

I ran maybe 2 km total as a warmup. Did two strides. They announced the start
would be soon so I went on over the start area. The organisation had placed
some signs so you knew where to line up: sub 65, 65-70, 70-75, and 75-80
minutes. The signs also said there would be pacers from 75 minutes and faster,
spread out around every 2-3 minutes. None of us where I was lined up actually
saw the 75 minute pacer though. Oh well. After a bit of an extra wait because
the police was still clearing the course, we eventually got ready and waited
for the gun.

## Race

At the start line I had noticed a younger looking guy, bit taller than me,
shirt was for RAAC club. <!-- Kevin Alfers --> After the gun, he was in front
of me, so I semi-followed him over the first 500 metre as a sort of pacing
guide. We were both on the inside of the track so that worked out. Getting out
of the track was a bit cramped, but then we were on the streets and things were
fine. Everybody is a bit looking for their pace so just focus on keeping things
under control and doing it right™. According to my watch, the pace was a few
seconds per km fast, but I figure that is just how these things start.

After about 2-3 km, I found myself at the front of a little group, with another
group maybe 10-20 metre ahead of us. The other group did not really pull away
and from time to time someone would zoom past me to get to that group.
Eventually I looked back, saw maybe 3 or 4 people, so I too decided to bridge
the gap. A brief acceleration later, I latched onto the back of my new group of
25(!) people (I counted the official 5 km split). I was happy here and hung at
the back of this group for the next several km. The pace kept perhaps a few
seconds faster than I wanted, but I was not going to let go of this group just
yet. The wind picked up along the water and it was interesting to see how we
all manoeuvred to try to not get hit too much by it. Did not feel like I was
protected much though. At some point along the water I also saw someone lying
face forward in the grass along the path. He looked like he might have been one
of the elite or pacing African runners. I wondered how you could be so dead so
shortly into a half marathon and whether he would be OK.

<!-- There is a picture of the very front of our group, but it seems a bit
strung out. Not sure at what exact point the photo was taken, but it is along
the water. Can't see me, think I'm outside of the picture. Next picture is of
the next group. -->

Around 6-6.5 km, we turn away from the water and shortly after the path also
narrows. Some jostling for position actually saw me move up in the group
without intending to. I felt good though and, without changing how the effort
felt, seemed to be slowly moving up in the group. The feeling did not last too
long. Around 8.5 km, when passing under a highway bridge, I felt a side stitch
developing. It did not hurt yet, but I recognised the signs and reined myself
in. I went backwards in the group, sort of hung on for a bit, and then went out
the back. But at least I did not have a side stitch.

As I tried to find the right effort again, I noticed I was alongside or in
front of a woman. I only mention it because in situations like these she,
rightfully so since she was maybe 10th at that time, gets more attention from
the crowd with constant shouts of encouragement for "Elke". We ran together for
a little bit, but by the time I hit the water again (around 10.5 km), I must
have gapped her: the shouts were further behind me.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20230312.ikke.halverwege.webp' description='Somewhere around the halfway point. Elke in the background. Think white shirt is Ploegsteert. Runner furthest in the back is probably fluo yellow patches.' %}

At some point a guy with a shirt that said "Ploegsteert" passed me and I
latched on. <!-- Possibly Siegert Lefevere --> We ran together for at least the
second half of the path along the river. He did most of the work in front, I
must admit. When we passed the spot where earlier the runner had been lying
face forward, there now were two ambulances on the one-car-wide path. We had to
squeeze past them. Now I really wondered what the hell had happened to the guy.
Anyway, I had my own suffering to focus on.

Ploegsteert and I left the river path and stuck together. At some point a guy
with some fluo yellow patches on his shirt passed us. <!-- Joeri Ameye? --> I
had spotted him a few times before as we yoyoed around one another throughout
the race. This time I decided to follow. It seemed fine. However.

When we hit the bridge area again, around 16.5 km, I had a side stitch issue
again. Now it was straight into pain. I tried to keep myself focused on the
pace, but it actually hurt, so I slowed down a little. I had to let fluo yellow
go. Soon, the side stitch was gone again. I think it was around the same spot
as it had disappeared the round prior. My conclusion: that stretch of road is
cursed. (Looking at the GPS splits, I am probably to blame though)

From here on, things are a bit more vague in my mind. I think Ploegsteert
passed me again and, feeling better, I decided to hang on to him. I seemed
alright again and started looking forward to the finish, breaking down the kms
into "just _x_ more minutes of holding on". We passed RAAC club guy, throughout
the race I had seen him up ahead, but had never got close to him. I switch to
following some guy in a triathlon suit, I assume he passed us and I latched on.

At around 20 km I decided it was time to just squeeze out anything I still had
left. I sped up, repeating to myself it was almost over anyway, just ignore any
complaints from the body. Back on the track where we started, I went into what
I choose to describe as a sprint, but probably did not look like anything. I
was passing other people though. As I came out of the final bend, two people
were also sprinting for the line and for a moment there all three of us were
abreast, racing our hearts out. It lifted my spirit and I tried my best to
outkick them. I failed, they beat me. I crossed the line and had no clue what
time I had. In my tunnelvision to sprint to the line and beat those guys, I had
not even thought about looking at the clock on the finish line or my watch at
any point in the past km.

## Results

Once past the line, I did check my watch. I did it, sub-75. Turns out "I'll go
out at sub-75 pace because it looks pretty" _is_ a valid tactic. [Official
results][results] place me at 1:14:52. There's also my [Strava] for gazing at
the map and splits.

## Future

Rotterdam.

[bkhalf]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2022-03-13-belgian-championship-half-marathon %} "BK half marathon (13 Mar 2022)"
[winterbase]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2023-03-11-some-racing-some-training %} "Some Racing, Some Training: Summer-Fall-Winter of 2022"
[results]: https://my.raceresult.com/236006/results
[strava]: https://www.strava.com/activities/8700582918
