---
layout: post
title: "American Long Dumb Shit"
date: 2025-05-12 18:00:00
tags:
  - heatmap
  - long dumb shit
---

In my heatmapping I have the number-goes-up street and hexagon progress to
focus on. However, sometimes I just want to do something… sillier. That is
where my little adventures come into play. The ideas I lovingly refer to as my
_Long Dumb Shit_.

In Belgium, I would plan these around train lines. Go to one stop, run to the
next. Repeat. Here, I do not have that luxury. Instead, I have to drive
somewhere and do a loop (or convince my wife to also waste half her day).
Progress is a little slower, but I do not mind.

## My Blob

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250512-long-dumb-shit/blob.avif' description='The PA blob in its current state.' %}

Besides the obvious blob around where we live, I have been creating tendrils
vaguely in the cardinal directions. The north and then west one follows the
"Horse Shoe Trail". East is aiming to connect Philadelphia's center city. South
came to be from having to drop my wife off at the Wilmington train station and
evolved into another sillier idea. West was more in the process of checking out
some parks and nature areas and then wanting to hook them up. For those north,
south, and west tendrils I have further ideas. More on them later in this post.

Now, there are still various loose miniblobs. Philadelphia is the most obvious
one, but I will get around to that eventually. The connection itself is easy:
there is a paved trail along the river. I figure I will be heading in that
general direction at some point and try to do it at that point.

The other loose miniblobs are just part of natural progress for now. Some from
races, others from checking out a different park or nature reserve, some just
from feeling like doing a few neighbourhoods of streets. I am not (yet) as
crazy about keeping every new place connected yet as I had become in Belgium. I
will connect them, at some point, no rush.

## Horse Shoe Trail

TODO: Add picture of the actual yellow horseshoe hanging somewhere

The Horse Shoe Trail is a 230 km long route connecting Valley Forge to the
Appalachian Trail. I believe I first encountered it years and years ago by
accident while running in Valley Forge. Specifically up Mount Joy and Mount
Misery there. After that, I mostly did not think about it any more for quite
some time.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250512-long-dumb-shit/hst.avif' description='Where the Horse Shoe Trail (in red) will be taking me. Start is around the King of Prussia and Norristown text on the map\'s east side. The end is in the north west.' %}

Until the past year that is. I have been slowly chipping away at it when I am
in the mood. It was easy enough at the start, all of that is quite nearby, but
by now requires a decent bit of driving to reach my next point. I am about
halfway through it. As with all things, there is no rush. That said, this is
definitely my main Long Dumb Shit goal, time permitting.

One of the weirder challenges with this has been, at times, finding a
convenient place to park the car. That is partially on me, I would like to
trace the trail if possible. In other words, no matter where I park, I need to
still connect to the HST. I cannot just connect my blob in the general
direction.

Just as a side note for non-American readers (or non native English speakers,
perhaps): while this is called the Horse Shoe _Trail_, it is not all on trail.
The word trail evokes a certain state of the path to me. The people managing
this trail do try to get land access for that kind of path, but there are
chunks where you are running on streets rather than a beaten path. They also
have something called "rail trails" here, which, at least in my area, seems to
largely be asphalt bike and walking paths following a former train line. Not
_trails_ in sight.


## Visiting the Capital

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250512-long-dumb-shit/dc.avif' description='That is a nice capital you have got down there.' %}

Philadelphia is nestled nicely in the middle between New York City and
Washington DC. After connecting so many things in Belgium, it seemed obvious:
connect all three together. I do not recall whether I had had this idea before or whether it
formed while I was making my Wilmington (Delaware) connection. At the very
least, the latter solidified the idea in my head.

This plan will be a total pain to actually get around to. It rather quickly
becomes a drive™ and I doubt I will be able to find nice nature running on this
route.

Mentally, I have made the focus here the DC side. My wife sometimes needs to be
in DC for work, her brother lives there, there is just more chance of us
heading in that direction. I figure I might be able to sometimes squeeze in a
run when we do so. Eventually there will be some progress.

The very shortest route (read: definitely not the one I will be able to take)
between my blob and the one in DC is 167 km. At a rate of "maybe I will make
some progress every 6 months" (at least once the first few 10s of km of that
are done) I think this will be a very long term goal indeed. Still, a man can
dream.

The distance is not even the first main hurdle to tackle here. Do you see that
big blue river there cutting through? That is the Susquehanna river and I have
to cross that. I had a look at the bridges across it and **THEY ARE ALL
HIGHWAYS**. Come on, America, stop hating everyone else. OK, some are
"highways", so more like state routes, but I still could not spot sidewalks or
shoulders I would feel safe on. As I get closer, I will have a better look at
all the bridges again, but for now I only see two options:

1. Cross all the way in the north west of this map, at Harrisburg. Not my
   preferred option.
2. Once a year in September (I should check up on that), there is a running
   race that uses the highway bridge near Havre de Grace. That is the point
   right before the river turns into a lake / bay. The plan is simple: sign up
   for that with the sole purpose of crossing the river. Even if my map is not
   close to it at that point, I will feel obligated to sign up just to tick
   that part off.

## SRT

Philadelphia and however far it goes.

## Connecting smaller trails: Enola low grade trail, Conestoga Trail

The straighter west tendril. Link up to Enola. Sideconnect to conestoga (if
that makes sense, check the map).
