---
layout: post
title: "Coming to America(n Heatmapping)"
date: 2025-02-01 12:00:00
tags:
  - heatmap
  - hexagons
---

Following up on [my leaving Belgium mentioned in the last
post][endofbelgiumheatmapping], let us have a look at what I have been up to in
my new area. I now reside in the suburbs of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. At
least, here they refer to it as suburbs of Philadelphia. In Belgium, you would
be several cities over. For reference to fellow Belgians: the distance from the
Philadelphia city hall to our area is about the distance from the Grand Place
in Brussels to the central train station in Antwerp.

## My Vicinity

In my immediate area, I am just focused on getting more streets in. Evidently.
It is going OK so far. Nothing groundbreaking happening here, just chipping
away at it with the [diminished amount of running][patellatendonupdate] I do
nowadays.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250201-heatmap/near.activities.avif' description='Map of my activities near me. The next three maps will use the same zoom and bounding box so you can compare more easily.' %}

Running here is not always ideal. This place is made for cars; pedestrians be
damned. The way to build here is often a busy road with dead end housing areas
branching off from the busy road. Such a housing area can be just one street or
it can be ten or more of them. In a housing area it is usually safe enough to
run. Many of them are like three cars wide and not that busy. Newer ones even
have sidewalks.

Going between those housing areas is often a pain though. The roads connecting
them are busy. They do not have sidewalks. Quite often they are only just two
cars wide, my guess is because this area got settled much before the
introduction of cars. If you are lucky, there is a flat grass section next to
the road that you can hop on to if a car is coming. If not… hope for the best.
Because of this, planning a running route involves a lot more thinking, a lot
more keeping track of areas to avoid, a lot of detours to get anywhere.

Anyway, you make do. You get where you can get. There is a decent amount of
nature, though the suburban lawns are a scourge on the earth (not to mention so
useless on hot and sunny days). There are so many big birds of prey here to
stare at in amazement. Those parts of running here are what I like.

With this area being so car heavy, I have also come to accept their usage
myself. In Belgium, I would have scoffed at the idea of driving somewhere to do
a run. Here, I do it as well from time to time, even just to run some streets,
not just for "adventure" runs. It just is such a pain to get to places
otherwise. That said, I find the driving places for a run also a pain, just one
I deal with from time to time.

### Cities

Because the roads to get places are just so dangerous to pedestrians and
because things are quite spread out, focusing on cities has not been as fun. If
you know you have to drive to get to the far side of places, it just becomes
more of a chore.

I still glance at their progress though. I have one "city" completed and two or
three near completion, depending on your definition of near completion. I am
not particularly focused on dragging them to completion though. Maybe once I
get to those last 5-10%.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250201-heatmap/near.cities.avif' description='Cities near me. Percentage is the percentage completed for that city on CityStrides.' %}

Something I also have a look at, is my ranking in all those cities. Not many
people here are active heatmappers (on CityStrides anyway). I am first in many
low percentage cities, just due to a lack of competition. There is one guy here
that has a few places completed, otherwise there would be even more first
places in the centre of the map there. A little competition can motivate me,
though since that person has them simply completed, it is not as exciting as a
race to be the first one to complete.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250201-heatmap/near.cities.rank.avif' description='Cities near me. Number is my rank for that city on CityStrides.' %}

### Hexagons

As I had done in Belgium, the hexagon map has been my focus of completion. The
map also paints a different picture. For some cities it looked like I had
widespread progress, the hexagon map shows I have just done streets near me.

{% include image.html domain=site.baseurl url='/assets/img/20250201-heatmap/near.hexagons.avif' description='Hexagons near me.' %}

The street grid is not very dense here, so completing a single hexagon might be
easier in comparison to Brussels? Though the hexagons are also about 15% larger
in area here: 0.73 km² instead of 0.63 km² in Brussels (reminder that the earth
is a sphere). That said, progress has felt slower than in Brussels.

My focus is on getting more green hexagons. Maybe once those really get to far
away from me, I will think more about the blue wave spreading too.

## PA Ranking

_TODO: Rerun regional leaderboard script._

## Fantasiekes

### HST

### DC/NYC

### Enola(?) low grade trail

### SRT?

[endofbelgiumheatmapping]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2025-01-26-end-of-belgian-heatmapping %} "The End of Belgian Heatmapping (26 Jan 2025)"
[patellatendonupdate]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2025-01-25-its-been-a-while %} "It's been a while (25 Jan 2025)"
