---
layout: post
title: "PRTC 5000m"
date: 2025-11-07 20:00:00
tags:
  - report
  - track
  - length:5000
---

It's… a race report? That has been forever. Running has had some highs, but
mostly lows due to a left knee patella tendon that gets annoyed too easily,
causing setbacks and just generally getting me worried about running much or
hard. Past maybe half year I have just been very conservative and mostly OK
though. After a small teaser at coming back to racing in August, I got invited
to join a friend's club's 5000m "time trial" race. Just a bunch of guys and
girls wanting to run fast. Sounds right up my alley, even if I am a long way
away from the shape I once was.

## Training

The last two years have been less consistent in running, from time to time my
left knee patella tendon complained too much and I put on the brakes. I think I
peaked around 70–75 km of running per week in that time with the best stretch
(in terms of distance) in the last quarter of 2024. A far cry from the 120 km I
often reached before that time period. Besides doing a parkrun somewhat faster
during a long run, I did not really dare to run very fast.

Back in January of this year, I had a patella tendon setback. Coming back from
that setback, in April, my right achilles tendon suddenly complained. I gave it
a week or so of rest, picked up some swimming, and decided to just stay
conservative for a long while.

In May and June, I just ran every other day. The non running days I either went
swimming or walking. Due to running every other day, half the weeks had three
days of running, the other half had four days of running. Distance-wise I built
up from 31 and 41 km (for the three day and four day week, respectively) to 42
and 55 km (again, respectively).

July and the first week of August, things were a little less consistent. There
was a trip to some national parks and a trip to my family across the ocean. The
national parks involve more-than-usual walking and I have been more careful
with this kind of trip, i.e., I am letting my running take a back-seat when the
walking jumps up like that. Visiting the family involves jet lag and that sleep
confusion can really mess up your body. So there too, I tried to be careful.
That said, I think I played it all correctly and did not push too hard. By the
end of that period I had switched to four days of running per week and about
55–60 km per week.

From the second week of August onwards, I felt more confident again. My body
seemed to have survived the switch to four days. I could let my life get into a
bit of a rhythm. I was running about 60 km per week. I was eager to try running
harder again. I tried a careful Lactate Threshold kind of workout (~1h race
pace), just 4×1k. Went OK but I had no clue where I was at in terms of shape,
so the workout was largely by feel and "this might be right".

I signed up for a 5 km race at the end of August (the week after that LT
workout) to have an idea where I was at. Ran it probably at the maximum I could
do on that day. I finished in 18:51. Did not know how I felt about it, but at
least it was a reference point to start doing workouts more regularly. The next
week I switched to five days per week so I could have a workout day, a GA day
that wasn't too long, and a long run day. The two other days are recovery jogs
to keep the weekly distance where I want it at, hovering near or at that 60 km
per week.

The week between that point and now, I stayed on that five days of running
schedule. Distance remained largely the same as I wanted to focus on dealing
with the workouts. Weekly running distance 60–62 km.

| Day | What              |
| :-- | :---------------- |
| Mon | Walk              |
| Tue | Jog (7±1 km)      |
| Wed | Workout (13±1 km) |
| Thu | Walk              |
| Fri | Run (13±1 km)     |
| Sat | Jog (7±1 km)      |
| Sun | Long run (21 km)  |

I did some different things and made the track my place to go mid week:
Repetition (around 1500m race pace), CV (around 30 mins race pace), and VO2max
(JD says 11 mins race pace, elsewhere also described as 3–5k race pace, but
that'll depend heavily on your speed). During this period the hot humid summer
ended and I felt stronger and stronger in the workouts. The VO2max ones
especially gave me confidence to think my shape was closer to 18 minutes for a
5 km. I was doing those workouts at paces that should have been more tiring,
but my heart rate remained surprisingly chill.

Similarly, I ended up moving some of my long runs to flat and simple river
trails (Perkiomen Trail and Schuylkill River Trail for the locals). This let me
run more strictly to heart rate and get an idea of what paces sticking to my
heart rate zones gave me. It had been hard to get a view on that in the months
prior: my routes had been hilly and the weather had been too sunny, too hot,
too humid. These flat long runs in pleasant running weather at a concentrated
clip gave me extra confidence too. I seemed faster than that race in August had
indicated.

|         Week | Workout Type | Workout Detail                                                                 |
| -----------: | :----------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 18 Aug (-11) | LT           | 4×1 km                                                                         |
| 25 Aug (-10) | Race         | 5 km mostly flat                                                               |
|   1 Sep (-9) | Repetition   | 3×(200, 200, 400) (goal: 41s for 200m)                                         |
|   8 Sep (-8) | CV           | 6×800 (goal: 3:08, actual: ±2s faster, jog 200m recovery)                      |
|  15 Sep (-7) | CV           | 6×800 (same approach, again 2–3s too fast)                                     |
|  22 Sep (-6) | CV           | 4×800, 1×600 (leg felt off, stopped, had been same goal)                       |
|  29 Sep (-5) | VO2max       | 4×1 km (3:38, :40, :42.5, :40.5, goal was :41, jog 300m recovery)              |
|   6 Oct (-4) | VO2max       | 4×1 km (:35, :36, :34, :33, goal was :37)                                      |
|  13 Oct (-3) | VO2max       | 4×1 km (:33, :33, :38, :36, goal still :37)                                    |
|  20 Oct (-2) | Repetition   | 4×200, 3×200, 3×200 (goal: 40s for 200m, jog 200m recovery, 400m between sets) |
|  27 Oct (-1) | Repetition   | 3×(4×200) (same note as previous)                                              |
|        4 Nov | This Race    | 5000m                                                                          |

Don't let this overview fool you, I was not prepping for this race. I got
invited to it the week prior and it seemed like a great opportunity. That said,
I am happy enough with this preparation.

## Goal and Strategy

So when I got invited, I had to give an estimated time. The VO2max at 3:37 per
km pace still felt easier than I think VO2max should feel like. That 3:37 per
km for that workout is prescribed for people with an 18:22 5 km time (JD
tables). If it feels too easy, I should be faster than that, right? Round it up
and you get **18 minutes**. So I filled that in as a goal. Was I sure that I
could run that? No, not at all. In fact, it felt a bit like an optimistic
stretch goal. Not much strategy involved in aiming for that, just go for the
even split. 18:00 is 3:36 per km, 43.2 seconds per 200m, 1:26.4 per 400, 2:52.8
per 800. Remember enough of those numbers and hope for the best on the day.

## Pre-Race

The race was in the evening, which usually involves me overthinking everything
I eat all day and when I eat it. None of that today. Made sure to eat enough
oatmeal for breakfast, was hungry at lunch and ate more bread than I usually
have been eating at lunch. Had some dinner leftovers around 15:00–16:00. Drink
enough water during the day and stop early enough with it. Was an hour drive in
traffic to get there, so left around 17:00 to arrive at the track at 18:00.

Found the organising group on the track and got my bib (a sticker for your
chest, a sticker for your pants). Passed by the toilet. Swung my legs and hips
a bit. Jogged on the track from 18:30 onwards. Toilet again. Some more dynamic
stretches. Switched into race clothes and shoes with 12 minutes to go (19:00
start). Started some strides with 2–3 minutes to go, heading towards the other
side of the track to arrive at the start position.

At the start line, I found out they had organised some pacers. One of them was
was going to do 18 minutes. Perfect. We said our hellos, one other guy and a
woman also were aiming for 18:00, so we had a little group of us. With that, we
were ready to get going and all lined up.

## Race

We were off and I quickly tucked into the inside of lane 1, right behind the
pacer. His back was going to be my view for a while. I listened to them call
out the time at the first 200m, 400m, and 800m, the pacing seemed on point. I
pressed the lap button at 1000m and indeed: 3:35.8.

There was some headwind on the far side (and thus probably some backwind on the
home stretch), but it was not that bad. The pacer reminded us to tuck in behind
him to have the wind blocked. I think I was still maybe half a head to a head
taller than him, but I replied that I was trying and it was mostly OK. I also
told him he was doing a great job, pacing us like clockwork.

The next five laps were uneventful. Things felt easy, sometimes feeling like I
was holding back a step to not bump into the pacer, but I also figured the
typical 5k pain could come quickly. I split at 1800 and the lap time looked
fine still. I forgot to split till 3000 and did not remember what a 1200m split
should be at. Did not bother trying to work that out and trusted the pacer.

Around that 3000 mark I started thinking "OK, stopping running would be
pleasant now". There's that familiar feeling! I brushed the thought away by
reminding myself it was only five more laps, less than nine minutes (dividing
18 by 2 is about all the math I could deal with).

Our group of four (pacer, me, other guy, woman) had dwindled down to three at
some point, the woman had to leave a gap. It did not really register during the
race, I think I vaguely noticed one running shadow fewer, but it also did not
matter much to me. I was here to see my time, not place.

With maybe three (or four? I don't remember) laps to go, the other guy started
speeding up. He went around me on the straight, then around the pacer around
the very start of the turn, then stayed on the inside of lane 2 for the rest of
the turn rather than cutting back into the inner lane. I wanted to yell at him
to not run so much extra, but did not feel like I had breath to spare at that
point. I also did not bother reacting to the acceleration whatsoever. Again, I
had the one goal here: see whether I could go under 18 again. I still did not
feel confident about it, I really was not sure about my shape. So instead I
stayed behind the pacer, letting him keep it at a nice just below 18 min pace.

With like two laps (I am guessing here with lap counts, things just get blurry
and keeping notes is not my main focus) to go my choice not to follow felt
vindicated as I started feeling painful stabs in my abs, slightly right from
center, slightly below the end of the ribs there. Running long with those stabs
was not going to work. I focused on switching my breathing a little and after
200 metre the pain subsided.

At about 500 metre to go, on the home stretch, the pacer started slowly veering
into the second lane. I got the hint, he wanted me to start pushing for the
end. Man, this guy knows what he is doing. I slowly passed him during that home
stretch. The other guy that had tried to break away from us was still only 5–10
steps ahead of us. I don't know when exactly I started pushing, I think I
waited till the 400 metre mark. I caught up to the other guy _fast_, went
around him, and immediately broke away again. The pacer yelled at the other guy
that he should try to hold on to me. The other guy could not. On the far side,
with 250 metre to go, I reigned in the pace a little bit, but not entirely.
Things felt surprisingly acceptable still. I was a little worried I had gone
out too hot on that final lap, but the body was not ready to call it quits yet.
I kept going, leg turnover remained OK. I pushed to the line without cracking.

## Results

Official time is 17:41, but it was all hand timed I believe, so let's say ±1
second. They also gave a "1 mile" and "2 mile" splits in the result. I assume
they mean 1600 and 3200 metre, because getting that mile, i.e., 1609 metre,
exactly seems unlikely. With that assumption, these are the numbers from the
official results.

| Distance |  Time | Lap Distance | Lap Time | Lap Pace |
| -------: | ----: | -----------: | -------: | -------: |
|     1600 |  5:43 |         1600 |     5:43 |     3:34 |
|     3200 | 11:27 |         1600 |     5:44 |     3:35 |
|     5000 | 17:41 |         1800 |     6:14 |     3:27 |

I also have manual splits from my watch. "Lap Offset" compares actual lap time
to expected lap time for an 18 minute 5000m (3:36.0 per km). "400m Offset"
normalises it to a 400m distance.

| Dist |    Time | Lap Dist | Lap Time | Lap Offset | 400m Offset | Lap Pace |
| ---: | ------: | -------: | -------: | ---------: | ----------: | -------: |
| 1000 |  3:35.8 |     1000 |   3:35.8 |    -0:00.2 |    -0:00.08 |   3:35.8 |
| 1800 |  6:27.6 |      800 |   2:51.8 |    -0:01.0 |     -0:00.5 |   3:34.8 |
| 3000 | 10:44.6 |     1200 |   4:17.0 |    -0:02.2 |     -0:01.1 |   3:34.2 |
| 3800 | 13:37.2 |      800 |   2:52.6 |    -0:00.2 |     -0:00.1 |   3:35.8 |
| 4600 | 16:27.8 |      800 |   2:50.6 |    -0:02.2 |     -0:01.1 |   3:33.3 |
| 5000 | 17:42.2 |      400 |   1:14.4 |    -0:12.0 |     -0:12.0 |   3:06.0 |

That kick was quite strong, I might have left too much in the tank. :)

Oh yeah, it was a race too. There were two heats, I was in the slow heat. I was
6th out of 10 people in my heat (pacers not listed in results). The fast heat
had 21 people. It was won in 14:46 with a slowest time of 16:50. So I was 27th
out of 31. The other guy from my group finished 4 seconds behind me. The girl
from our group that wanted to go sub 18 finished in 18:04. The friend that had
invited me to this race had been aiming for sub 16:00, which might already have
been a PR for him. He blasted that goal out of the water and finished in 15:34
with a big negative split and looking in control for a lot of it. Fireball.jpg.

## Musings and Future

Well. My workouts will be getting a jump in intensity now. I surprised myself
today. My maybe sub 18 turned into blasting under and having some left in the
tank. It also feels nice to achieve this on just 60 km per week. I was running
twice as much before all this nonsense, though my PR was also more than a
minute faster back then. I have to learn to stop comparing myself to that
though. Those days are gone. For now.

Now logically I should be looking for another race a month or so from now.
Regroup, do a few workouts, aim for something faster. Find out the limit of
this shape I am in. However, we have some travel coming up later this month.
Then the end of the month after that heading to my family across the ocean.
This will mess up my running consistency a little. I might decide on a race on
a whim, but I do not dare to plan for one.
